'Oh yes, you do,'
'It'
'Ah!'
'These black men,'
'I'
'Don'
`Now where'
'd had bite or sup, he did.'
's going off has been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.'
'Am I right in guessing that you are the Glóin, one of the twelve companions of the great Thorin Oakenshield?'
'll do my best to finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if I am spared.'
"Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders as I do myself!"
"What message?"
"Curse it! curse it! curse it!"
"It'
"Then let'
"Yes, you do!"
's palace. Magic shut the gates, but be could sometimes get out, if he was quick. Companies of the Wood-elves, sometimes with the king at their head, would from time to time ride out to hunt, or to other business in the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if Bilbo was very nimble, he could slip out just behind them; though it was a dangerous thing to do. More than once he was nearly caught in the doors, as they clashed together when the last elf passed; yet he did not dare to march among them because of his shadow (altogether thin and wobbly as it was in torch-light), or for fear of being bumped into and discovered. And when he did go out, which was not very often, he did no good. He did not wish to desert the dwarves, and indeed he did not know where in the world to go without them. He could not keep up with the hunting elves all the time they were out, so he never discovered the ways out of the wood, and was left to wander miserably in the forest, terrified of losing himself, until a chance came of returning. He was hungry too outside, for he was no hunter; but inside the caves he could pick up a living of some sort by stealing food from store or table when no one was at hand. "
"That will save him some of the trouble he is in for,"
"I believe he is trying to tell us something,"
"Farewell, King under the Mountain!"
'queer'
"Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it."
's found it, yes he must have. My birthday-present."
't a bad fellow, and quite decent to the prisoners. It will puzzle them all too. They will think we had a very strong magic to pass through all those locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to get busy very quick, if that is to happen!"
"or keep you from much needed rest. Ponies take some catching, I believe, after a long start. And so do burglars,"
"Here is the first payment of your reward! Cast off your old coat and put on this!"
'You don'
'Do you indeed!'
'I can'
'Well, you can'
'd have thought it in our times!'
're arrested for Gate-breaking, and Tearing up of Rules, and Assaulting Gate-keepers, and Trespassing, and Sleeping in Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.'
've arrested you.'
'll take you there. '
've been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined my taters!'
's behaved hisself and given satisfaction?'
'Ha! ha! What does we wish?'
`Oh no, not if it doesn'
