's face. `
't really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time doesn'
' he said. `
`It was both a shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.'
"A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same to you, my good sir,"
"Bravo!"
's reputation went up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of Gandalf'
"Well, it is the first time that even a mouse has crept along carefully and quietly under my very nose and not been spotted,"
"Help!"
"What have we done, O king?"
"That does not prove it,"
"It is about our turn to help,"
"Quite right!"
"Here,"
"I only wish he was a raven!"
"We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure,"
"They have come!"
"Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!"
"The new Master is of wiser kind,"
't mind some cake-seed-cake, if you have any."
"but it will be easy enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive there."
"That is only the beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have to get through, or over, or under those somehow, before we can come into Wilderland beyond. And it is a deal of a way even from the other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the East Where Smaug lies on our treasure."
"and I take off my hood to you."
"What was that? I thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest."
' rouse the spiders with your riot and clamour? After all the disturbance you have made I have a right to know what brings you here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep you all in prison until you have learned sense and manners!"
't doubt you are right. But he might be gone away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek."
"and I am quite willing to go. Anyway I expect it is safe for the moment."
"And I think I know which way we should go: we ought to make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain."
"here we can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen."
"but I cannot follow the speech of such birds, it is very quick and difficult. Can you make it out Baggins?"
"Keep watch now, and see what happens!"
"And their camp is very great. They must have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river."
"If ever you visit us again, when our halls are made fair once more, then the feast shall indeed be splendid!"
"and very popular, for, of course, he gets most of the credit for the present prosperity. They are making songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold."
