'lndeed,'
"Wait! Wait!"
"He may have a good head for business-especially his own business,"
"Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth,"
"I am the last man to undervalue Bard the Bowman,"
"Fools!"
"That will be the last we shall hear of Thorin Oakenshield, I fear,"
"A just question,"
"The Elvenking is my friend, and he has succoured the people of the Lake in their need, though they had no claim but friendship on him,"
"I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins,"
"Well, let him!"
"Why do you tell us this? Are you betraying your friends, or are you threatening us?"
"This is the Arkenstone of Thrain,"
"Hail Thorin!"
"We are not thieves,"
"Until then we keep the stone,"
"Not so hasty!"
"Fools!"
"To the Mountain!"
"It will not be long now,"
"There let it lie till the Mountain falls!"
"we would make him a king. Bard the Dragon-shooter of the line of Girion! Alas that he is lost!"
"He dived from Esgaroth, when the enemy was slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!"
"Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags,"
"why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be deposed? Who aroused the dragon from his slumber, I might ask? Who obtained of us rich gifts and ample help, and led us to believe that old songs could come true? Who played on our soft hearts and our pleasant fancies? What sort of gold have they sent down the river to reward us? Dragon-fire and ruin! From whom should we claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and orphans?"
" Then even as he was speaking, the thought came into his heart of the fabled treasure of the Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of the Master'
's messengers found him now marching with many spearmen and bowmen; and crows were gathered thick, above him, for they thought that war was awakening again, such as had not been in those parts for a long age. But the king, when he received the prayers of Bard, had pity, for he was the lord of a good and kindly people; so turning his march, which had at first been direct towards the Mountain, he hastened now down the river to the Long Lake. He had not boats or rafts enough for his host, and they were forced to go the slower way by foot; but great store of goods he sent ahead by water. Still elves are light-footed, and though they were not in these days much used to the marches and the treacherous lands between the Forest and the Lake, their going was swift. Only five days after the death of the dragon they came upon the shores and looked on the ruins of the town. Their welcome was good, as may be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make any bargain for the future in return for the Elvenking'
"But you are not dead, and we are not robbers. Moreover the wealthy may have pity beyond right on the needy that befriended them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered."
"We will give you time to repent your words. Gather your wisdom ere we return!"
"Such a fool deserves to starve."
't be so hasty! I never met such suspicious folk! I am merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will make you an offer!!"
"Are you still of the same mind?"
"Your own we will give back in return for our own."
"We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will return, and see if you have brought from the hoard the portion that is to be set against the stone. If that is done without deceit, then we will depart, and the elf-host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile farewell!"
's arm! They do not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. There are many of our archers and spearmen now hidden in the rocks upon their right flank. Dwarf-mail may be good, but they will soon be hard put to it. Let us set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!"
"To the Mountain! Let us take our places while there is yet time!"
's feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur'
"We will honour the agreement of the dead, and he has now the Arkenstone in his keeping."
"This treasure is as much yours as it is mine; though old agreements cannot stand, since so many have a claim in its winning and defence. Yet even though you were willing to lay aside all your claim, I should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not prove true: that we should give you little. I would reward you most richly of all."
