`Indeed it is,'
"Yes it certainly is! No I could not! And I was explaining very carefully,"
"Yes; not a bad fellow as wizards go, I believe. I used to see him now and again,"
"Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that,"
"One or three you meant, I see!"
"I don'
"Go on telling, then!"
"Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won'
"Hullo!"
"Nori at your service, Ori at . . ."
"Now go on again!"
"Good!"
"That'
"O let '
"Good heavens!"
"Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that is all that there were up the trees. Now perhaps we can finish this story without any more interruptions."
"It is time for us to sleep,"
"Mostly inside us,"
"O! out and about somewhere,"
"I have been picking out bear-tracks,"
"It was a good story, that of yours,"
"Come and see!"
"The goblins,"
"Beorn is not as far off as you seem to think, and you had better keep your promises anyway, for he is a bad enemy. Mr. Baggins'
"Stop! stop!"
"It looks as if my dreams were coming true,"
"I would give a good many of these precious goblets, thought, "
"Smaug is dead!"
"Well, now I know who you are, or who you say you are. What do you want?"
't hobbits, they are dwarves!"
"but I expect you need mine. I am not over fond of dwarves; but if it is true you are Thorin (son of Thrain, son of Thror, I believe), and that your companion is respectable, and that you are enemies of goblins and are not up to any mischief in my lands-what are you up to, by the way?"
"You came pretty quick-where were you hiding? Come on my jack-in-the-boxes!"
"It is some good being a wizard, then."
"Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!"
't fifteen and they know it."
's nose and the death from the wizard'
"but I like it still better now I am sure it is true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the edge of Mirkwood, you would take the word of no one that you did not know as well as your brother or better. As it is, I can only say that I have hurried home as fast as I could to see that you were safe, and to offer you any help that I can. I shall think more kindly of dwarves after this. Killed the Great Goblin, killed the Great Goblin!"
"will not dare to cross the Great River for a hundred miles north of the Carrock nor to come near my house - it is well protected at night!- but I should ride fast; for if they make their raid soon they will cross the river to the south and scour all the edge of the forest so as to cut you off, and Wargs run swifter than ponies. Still you are safer going north, even though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they will least expect, and they will have the longer ride to catch you. Be off now as quick as you may!"
' eyes are sharper than yours, if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard you and guide you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves his animals as his children. You do not guess what kindness he has shown you in letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you tried to take them into the forest."
"A feast would be no good, if we never got back alive from it,"
's wooden bowls!"
's shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-size in his wrath. The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of the fray. Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River; and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood-elves'
