'question'
's back, though he did not yet understand what had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his '
's first story, as soon as he heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a '
's Book was thus the first copy made of the Red Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many corrections, especially of names, words, and quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated version of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the King. But the chief importance of Findegil'
"present"
'That'
'I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!'
'None at all,'
`Well, there are many reasons why they should,'
`Quite right,'
'I will come and see them, if ever I can,'
`Hullo, Frodo my lad!'
`He shall be found,'
'And Gandalf said: "
`Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,'
`Well, Strider is one that I haven'
`The Dúnadan,'
`Well, my dear fellow,'
'I won'
`You needn'
`It is difficult to keep awake here, until you get used to it;'
`It is a song to Elbereth,'
`And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,'
`Quite right, Sam,'
`Hullo! Good morning!'
`That is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,'
`But not yet, I beg, Master!'
`Not bad,'
`Yes, long and weary,'
`This is grievous news concerning Saruman,'
'Very well, very well, Master Elrond!'
`Of course, my dear Bilbo,'
`Well, anyway,'
'That can'
`How long do you think I shall have here?'
`Oh, I don'
'Oh, that won'
'Also there is this!'
`Very well, I will take it,'
'Just a plain hobbit you look,'
'Good . . . good luck!'
`Why, you'
`No, I'
`Ah,'
'precious'
'precious'
'precious'
'birthday present'
's account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Troll'
's first successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was warm and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls'
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it came from robbers.'
`I wonder where he is. I wish he was here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh, The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!'
`a perfect house, whether you like food or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all'
`So you have got here at last. I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?'
" Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after you, so I let things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and sound.'
's have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!'
'Ah, there you are at last, Dúnadan!'
`What do you call him that for?'
'But often I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.'
's go off into a corner and polish it up!'
'But it would be too tiring to repeat it all.'
'll leave you to guess, if you want to.'
't know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing rather above my head, and he said that if I had the cheek to make verses about Eärendil in the house of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.'
'Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the elvish appetite for music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. They will be going on for a long time yet. What do you say to slipping off for some more quiet talk?'
`They will sing that, and other songs of the Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come on!'
`I guess you mean that it is time your master went to bed.'
'll take a walk, I think, and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!'
`Feel ready for the great council?'
`Already the Sun is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.'
't kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes, but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!'
`If you had really started this affair, you might be expected to finish it. But you know well enough now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only a small part is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you are making a valiant offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come back.'
't suppose I have the strength or luck left to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have not. But tell me: what do you mean by they?'
's room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo'
'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?'
't wait now fill spring; and you can'
'But quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping me with my book, and making a start on the next? Have you thought of an ending?'
`Books ought to have good endings. How would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily ever after?'
't tell anybody else! But I should feel happier if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the knives of the Black Riders,'
'But there is more about you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!'
't be too long! Farewell!'
's voice speaking. I don'
`There is more about you than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.'
't bear to think of bringing the news to him.'
's stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess. A nasty name. Gollum, maybe? '
"Good morning!"
"All of them at once,"
"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!"
"Thank you!"
"Lots!"
"Gandalf for certain this time,"
"At yours and your family'
's. The Gandalf'
"Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!"
"What about a little light?"
"Of course!"
's style. He was an important dwarf. If he had been allowed, he would probably have gone on like this until he was out of breath, without telling any one there '
"That'
"It seems a great big hole to me,"
"Very well then,"
"I don'
"Hear, hear!"
"If you had dusted the mantelpiece you would have found this just under the clock,"
"But-"
"But-"
"I'
's pipe and tobacco. So after that the party went along very merrily, and they told stories or sang songs as they rode forward all day, except of course when they stopped for meals. These didn'
"Now it is the burglar'
"all this dwarvish racket,"
' purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. "
"Bilbo Baggins, a bur­- a hobbit,"
"Yes, lots,"
"What I say,"
"a sack, Tom, quick!"
"It'
"O! are they?"
"Excellent!"
"Would this be any good?"
"Where'
"Is that The Mountain?"
"O!"
"Here it is at last!"
"Hrnmm! it smells like elves!"
"Well, well!"
"The summer is getting on down below,"
't know how far they go back, sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But now Fili and Kill'
"Dwarves, and this!"
"Follow me quick!"
"Half a minute!"
"Very well,"
"Easy!"
"All right!"
"Half a moment!"
"Ss, ss, ss,"
"Well,"
"Is it nice, my preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?"
"It must make haste, haste!"
"Very well! Guess away!"
"Wrong,"
"Wrong!"
"Come on!"
"Both wrong,"
"Never you mind,"
"Well, hurry up!"
"Where is it? Where iss it?"
"What'
"Well, so am I,"
"But you never guessed my last question, and you promised,"
"Oh well, if it'
"What has it got in its pocketses?"
"What have you lost?"
"A bit low for goblins, at least for the big ones,"
"And here'
"Your servant, Mr. Baggins,"
"And then I couldn'
"What did I tell you?"
"I am so dreadfully hungry,"
"No thank you!"
"I daresay,"
"Must we go any further?"
"O no! Not a bit like storks-forks, I mean,"
"The Lord of the Eagles bids you to bring your prisoners to the Great Shelf,"
'prisoners'
"I am nearly dead of it,"
's back and cling between his wings. The air rushed over him and he shut his eyes. The dwarves were crying farewells and promising to repay the lord of the eagles if ever they could, as off rose fifteen great birds from the mountain'
"And why is it called the Carrock?"
"What! a furrier, a man that calls rabbits conies, when he doesn'
"That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and unimpeachable reputation,"
"Where is Gandalf?"
"What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?"
"Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock,"
"No! no!"
"There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and twice that south. But you wouldn'
"How far away do you think it is?"
"I don'
"Not far enough!"
"Steady!"
"Who'
"somebody"
"But without a feast we shan'
"No rushing forward this time! No one is to stir from hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to them. They won'
"Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield,"
"It is poor old Bombur, I'
"Fili or Kili,"
"Lazy Lob"
"Go on! Go on!"
"Gollum! Well I'
"Upon my word!"
"Very well!"
"Well, are you alive or are you dead?"
"We have none,"
"doorstep"
"The key! The key!"
"The key!"
"What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?"
"Old Smaug is weary and asleep,"
"Truly songs and tales fall utterly short of the reality, O Smaug the Chiefest and Greatest of Calamities,"
"I am the friend of bears and the guest of eagles. I am Ringwinner and Luckwearer; and I am Barrel-rider,"
't want to reveal your proper name (which is wise), and don'
"Dwarves!"
"I have always understood,"
"I might have guessed it,"
"Dazzlingly marvellous! Perfect! Flawless! Staggering!"
'door-step.'
"Drat the bird!"
"Well, he'
's lair was not one they liked. Also everything seemed quite quiet, both outside and down the tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside not far down from the half-open door and went on talking. The talk turned to the dragon'
"Sh! sh!"
"Now I am a burglar indeed!"
"Well!"
"That won'
"Hear, hear!"
"Not very well,"
"And little food to use!"
"It is warm enough inside,"
"Not as stiff as my legs,"
"Servant, indeed!"
"Really you know,"
"Quite so,"
"My dear Bard!"
"Thank you very much I am sure,"
"Well done! Mr. Baggins!"
"I gave it them!"
"You! You!"
"By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!"
"You all seem in league!"
"Dear me! Dear me!"
"Get down now to your friends!"
"What about the gold and silver?"
"The Eagles! the Eagles!"
"The Eagles!"
"What voice is it that speaks among the stones?"
"A nasty knock on the head, I think,"
"I am sorry. I mean, I should have liked to see them again,"
"Very kind of you,"
"If ever you are passing my way,"
"I beg of you,"
"Well, er, I thought, don'
's house; and there for a while they both stayed. Yule-tide was warm and merry there; and men came from far and wide to feast at Beorn'
"So comes snow after fire, and even dragons have their ending!"
"Well, Merry People!"
"Merry is May-time!"
"But it is the last road,"
's own door. "
'clock sharp. It was now nearly lunch-time, and most of the things had already been sold, for various prices from next to nothing to old songs (as is not unusual at auctions). Bilbo'
"Come in! Come in!"
"Then the prophecies of the old songs have turned out to be true, after a fashion!"
"Thank goodness!"
"Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want not; or that you feel good this morning; or that it is morning to be good on?"
's no hurry, we have all the day before us!"
"struck by lightning, struck by lightning!"
's have little light on this!"
"How could such a large door be kept secret from everybody outside, apart from the dragon?"
's that?"
"but with never a thank-you"
't get your note until after 10.45 to be precise."
"Bother burgling and everything to do with it! I wish I was at home in my nice hole by the fire, with the kettle just beginning to sing!"
't, hoot twice like a barn-owl and once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can."
't sup-pose you or I would notice anything at all on a windy night, not if the whole cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo walking primly towards the red light, I don'
"this is a beginning!"
"No, none at all, not one,"
't have me for supper."
's arms, and rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom whacked at then both with a branch to bring them to their senses-and that of course only made them madder than ever. That would have been the time for Bilbo to have left. But his poor little feet had been very squashed in Bert'
"a sack, Tom, quick!"
're hiding in the bushes with sacks,"
's leg-as well as he could, it was thick as a young tree-trunk -but he was sent spinning up into the top of some bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin'
"I found it on the ground where the trolls had their fight."
't it delicious!"
"He is too fat to get through key-holes yet!"
's Day"
"Mountain, I suppose."
'll puzzle the nasty little underground creature,"
"Sun on the daisies it means, it does."
"Dark!"
's not a kettle boiling over, as you seem to think from the noise you are making."
"what about your guess?"
"Fish on a little table, man at table sitting on a stool, the cat has the bones"
"Give me more time! Give me time!"
"What have I got in my pocket?"
"Guess again!"
"Last guess!"
"I am waiting!"
"A promise is a promise."
"Losst it is, my precious, lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!"
"What have you lost?"
"and I want to get unlost. And I won the game, and you promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your looking!"
"Answers were to be guessed not given,"
"then I asked one first. What have you lost? Tell me that!"
'll have heard his shrieking and cursing. Careful now, or this way will lead you to worse things."
's reputation went up a very great deal with the dwarves after this. If they had still doubted that he was really a first-class burglar, in spite of Gandalf'
"O, just crept along, you know-very carefully and quietly."
' But he came at me to kill me, and I ran, and fell over, and he missed me in the dark. Then I followed him, because I heard him talking to himself. He thought I really knew the way out, and so he was making for it. And then he sat down in the entrance, and I could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate."
"My toes are all bruised and bent, and my legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an empty sack."
"my poor legs, my poor legs!"
'prisoners,'
'prisoners rescued from the goblins'
"A warm bath and late breakfast on the lawn afterwards;"
' "
't you better explain it all a bit clearer?"
"I have heard of you, if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin Radagast who lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?"
's big black chair of the same sort (in which he sat with his great legs stuck far out under the table). These were all the chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had them low like the tables for the convenience of the wonderful animals that waited on him. What did the rest sit on? They were not forgotten. The other ponies came in rolling round drum-shaped sections of logs, smoothed and polished, and low enough even for Bilbo; so soon they were all seated at Beorn'
"-for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound and safe, but I warn you all not to forget what Beorn said before he left us: you must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril."
"Where is breakfast?"
"if he leads all the Wargs and the goblins down here? We shall all be caught and killed! I thought you said he was not 9 friend of theirs."
"Hush! Take no notice!"
't look so glum. Cheer up Thorin and Company! This is your expedition after all. Think of the treasure at the end, and forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until tomorrow morning!"
"a sort of watching and waiting feeling,"
't mean that. I meant, is there no way round?"
't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark tower! Stick to the forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a tremendous slice of luck you may come out one day and see the Long Marshes lying below you, and beyond them, high in the East, the Lonely Mountain where dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you."
"not animal eyes, only they are much too big."
't it have been this side!"
't be sure in this light; but it looks to me as if it was just drawn up on the bank, which is low just there where the path goes down into the water."
't suppose the magic is strong enough to hurt you, if you just touch a bit of wet rope."
"you have thrown it right into the wood on the other side now. Draw it back gently."
"Bombur has fallen in! Bombur is drowning!"
'purple emperor,'
't do anything nasty to him."
"Bilbo Baggins! Hobbit! You dratted hobbit! Hi! hobbit, confusticate you, where are you?"
"What a mess we are in now! We! I only wish it was we: it is horrible being all alone."
"This is the dreariest and dullest part of all this wretched, tiresome, uncomfortable adventure! I wish I was back in my hobbit-hole by my own warm fireside with the lamp shining!"
's feasts only, and for smaller bowls, not for the butler'
's folks were merrymaking. At last after much blundering they came to Thorin'
"Gandalf spoke true, as usual. A pretty fine burglar you make, it seems, when the time comes. I am sure we are all for ever at your service, whatever happens after this. But what comes next?"
't suppose I shall ever get hold of the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try."
's yours after all and not mine-you had better slap your arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!"
"What else is there?"
"We have no need of weapons, who return at last to our own as spoken of old. Nor could we fight against so many. Take us to your master!"
" in fun, remembering Bilbo'
't think I could bear to see the unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that steaming gate! ! !"
"Perhaps the wizard will suddenly come back today,"
"Where is Thorin?"
"The key that went with the map! Try it now while there is still time!"
" and stopped where he could still see the faint outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the rustle of the whispering voices of the others just outside. Then the hobbit slipped on his ring, and warned by the echoes to take more than hobbit'
's little head. Before him lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the Mountain'
'll hear no more of that."
's no good here."
's work, but to steal treasure. I made the best beginning I could. Did you expect me to trot back with the whole hoard of Thror on my back? If there is any grumbling to be done, I think I might have a say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it reflects great credit on your grandfather, but you cannot pretend that you ever made the vast extent of his wealth clear to me. I should want hundreds of years to bring it all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit."
" He had forgotten or had never heard about dragons'
"that dragons were softer underneath, especially in the region of the-er-chest; but doubtless one so fortified has thought of that."
"Truly there can; nowhere be found the equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat of fine diamonds!"
"Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!"
't nearly through this adventure yet,"
't like the look of him."
't suppose there are any people left there that trouble with thrush-language."
"I am sure he knows we came from Lake-town and had help from there; and I have a horrible feeling that his next move may be in that direction. I wish to goodness I had never said that about Barrel-rider; it would make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men."
"It seems we have got to go and help our burglar."
"I never expected to be looking out of this door. And I never expected to be so pleased to see the sun again, and to feel the wind on my face. But, ow! this wind is cold!"
's go somewhere where we can sit quiet for a bit!"
"In the meanwhile where is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain looking down at us!"
't suppose the snails have!"
"but the old fellow seems .very excited."
"I am tired of stairs and stone passages. I would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes."
"I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the next watchman."
" He drew from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin'
"I see your point of view. At the same time winter is coming on fast. Before long you will be having snow and what not, and supplies will be difficult - even for elves I imagine. Also there will be other difficulties. You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?"
"the Heart of the Mountain; and it is also the heart of Thorin. He values it above a river of gold. I give it to you. It will aid you in your bargaining."
't think I ought to leave my friends like this, after all we have gone through together. And I promised to wake old Bombur at midnight, too! Really I must be going, and quickly."
"There is always more about you than anyone expects!"
"Never again will I have dealings with any wizard or his friends. What have you to say, you descendant of rats?"
"I am sure this is all very uncomfortable. You may remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps I took it too literally -1 have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word than in deed. The time was, all the same, when you seemed to think that I had been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the service of you and your family that I was promised. Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share as I wished, and let it go at that!"
"or I will throw you down."
"This invisibility has its drawbacks after all. Otherwise I suppose I might have spent a warm and comfortable night in bed!"
"But I have a helm and a hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws."
"You are called for;"
"This is a bitter adventure, if it must end so; and not a mountain of gold can amend it. Yet I am glad that I have shared in your perils - that has been more than any Baggins deserves."
"that I woke up when I did. I wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we parted in kindness. You are a fool, Bilbo Baggins, and you made a great mess of that business with the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, but I suppose you can hardly be blamed for that."
"perhaps I shall see them on the way home. I suppose I shall be going home soon?"
't know what I should have done with it when I got home. I am sure it is better in your hands."
't wait to knock! Tea is at four; but any of you are welcome at any time!"
"to accept this gift!"
"that, er, some little return should be made for your, er, hospitality. I mean even a burglar has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much of your bread."
"And I name you elf-friend and blessed. May your shadow never grow less (or stealing would be too easy)! Farewell!"
's bidding. The goblins of the Misty Mountains were now few and terrified, and hidden in the deepest holes they could find; and the Wargs had vanished from the woods, so that men went abroad without fear. Beorn indeed became a great chief afterwards in those regions and ruled a wide land between the mountains and the wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of taking bear'
"I wish now only to be in my own arm-chair!"
"What time by the moon is this? Your lullaby would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you."
"But our back is to legends and we are coming home. I suppose this is a first taste of it."
"You had better take this, Gandalf. I daresay you can find a use for it."
"Something is the matter with you! You are not the hobbit that you were."
's going on?"
"Poor old Baggins!"
's Holiday"
' waistcoat was more extensive (and had real gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balm'
's thought hovered. '
'Do you know what this day is that Aragorn speaks of? For we are happy here, and I don'
'What a pity!'
'Thank you, my dear fellow!'
'They'
'But no! That came in his tale, long long ago. This is my tale, and it is ended now. Good-bye!'
'he is waiting for the same day, and he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out.'
'How splendid! How wonderful! But where were we?'
'I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice just to know that you are about the place. But I am getting very sleepy.'
's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?'
't it: to get rid of it? But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things seem to have got mixed up with it: Aragorn'
'That really is a very great relief to my mind.'
'And he will pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!'
'Eärendil was a mariner that tarried in Arvernien…'
'He built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey in …'
