`And who are you, and what have you to do with Minas Tirith?'
`Not this at least.'
`May the day not be too long delayed,'
`I would have begged you to come,'
`I am,'
`Maybe,'
'I will add a word of advice, if I may,'
'I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,'
`We cannot go further tonight,'
`This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,'
`Well,'
'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with you,'
'How far is Moria? '
'Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,'
'But do not you know the word, Gandalf? '
'Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?'
'Do not let him run away! '
`No indeed! '
'Which way shall we go? '
'And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,'
`Gondor! '
`Then lead on! '
'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,'
`Well, have a care! '
`As for me,'
`If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way to Minas Tirith,'
`I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,'
'All together, paddle! '
'What do you think? '
'I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River any further,'
'Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the Orcs prowl on the east-shore,'
`That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,'
`You are kind,'
`Warning? Warning against what? '
'As you wish. I care not,'
`Then you will come to Minas Tirith? '
'But you will come, at least for a while? '
`Why are you so unfriendly? '
`It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,'
`Come, come, my friend! '
'Is that all that you have to say? '
`We shall all be scattered and lost,'
`If ever such a tale was told in the South, it has long been forgotten. I have heard of the Great Ring of him that we do not name; but we believed that it perished from the world in the ruin of his first realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.'
`Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?'
`Yet we are hard pressed, and the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope-if such a thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past.'
' he said. '
'All know in Gondor that he went first to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to him the rule of the South Kingdom. In that time he planted there the last sapling of the White Tree in memory of his brother.'
`He is a small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became of him? To what doom did you put him?'
`It is a lie that comes from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan; true and valiant, our allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.'
'that they will buy their lives with horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without reason, for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from the Shadow. and their race, as that of their masters, is descended from the free days of old.'
'Gondor wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength is still very strong.'
`Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide - if the hand that wields it has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.'
'For though I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that others fought also with all the means that they have.'
'But always I have let my horn cry at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth as a thief in the night.'
'I was born under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.'
"They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.'
`Let those call it the wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are aimed at us.'
'The choice seems near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us, but that will not help us.'
`and the wind is quieter.'
`when heads are at a loss bodies must serve, as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See! Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.'
`And doughty Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.'
'I am weary, but I still have some strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will begin with you.'
`Nor do I see the need to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin, and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.'
' answered Gandalf. '
`He may watch all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.'
'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.'
`that Gandalf will find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!'
`You told us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be, if you did not know how to enter? '
' he added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, '
'It seems that we shall need him still, if the wolves do not find us. How I hate this foul pool! '
't disturb it! '
`In the deep places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who will lead us now in this deadly dark? '
`Which way shall we take? Yonder eastward arch? '
`The fire has cut them off. We are on the wrong side! '
'Is there no other way? '
`By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped unscathed.'
`But it is perilous.'
`Maybe it was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.'
`She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,'
`I do not feel too sure of this Elvish Lady and her purposes.'
`my way home lies onward and not back.'
`But I am not the leader of the Company.'
`It is a choice between defending a strong place and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I see it.'
's thought was different from his final words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said something like this at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign that he had heeded Boromir'
`But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives'
`This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night! But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.'
'Paddle! Or we shall be driven on the shoals.'
`If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.'
`And even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? '
`and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.'
`If you go forward, peril will grow with every mile, even if you find a path.'
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.'
`I wish to help you. You need counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine? '
'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.'
'The Ring! Is it not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? '
'It is best that it should lie hidden,'
'Yet may I not even speak of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing, you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly, if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? '
'Gandalf, Elrond - all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves they may be right. These elves and half-elves and wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the -Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior do in this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!'
' He laid his hand on the hobbit'
`I am a true man, neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! '
`How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is the men of Númenor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me! '
'Why not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you, halfling,'
`Have you seen Frodo? '
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not find him again. I thought he would return to you.'
'Yes, I wish that indeed,'
's need, and would not have squandered what fortune gave. He would have brought me a mighty gift.'
'But I who was his father say that he would have brought it to me. You are wise, maybe, Mithrandir, yet with all your subtleties you have not all wisdom. Counsels may be found that are neither the webs of wizards nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter more lore and wisdom than you deem. '
'Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,'
'That is as it should be,'
'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,'
'Alas!'
'But it was at the coming of the Halfling that Isildur'
`So!'
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of death have many wings. Night oft brings news to near kindred, '
'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?'
'I am unscathed, for I was not here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.'
's sake. But that is not the only part they have to play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even as we talk here, I hear the first rumblings. Saruman had best not be caught away from home when the dam bursts!'
`What did she say to you, the Lady that dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you ever to Laurelindórenan, and came not by your own road, upon the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning?'
`or even from the fell thing you name, the Balrog - even though he was the last to leave.'
' he said. `
