'How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went further from the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have been the first actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim, of course, to have done everything before the people of the Shire, whom they refer to as "
'There now!'
'Well, now, what was I going to say?'
'Who is that?'
'Him?'
'And I say there'
'I shan'
'Certainly!'
'No, I don'
'A stout little fellow with red cheeks,'
'Well, what have you done?'
'It'
'Well, you know your own business, maybe,'
'Save us!'
'I hope not, indeed,'
'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on a holiday!'
'Can'
's ponies had escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom'
'If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,'
' "
` "
't often get a party out of the Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as there hasn'
't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!'
't think you introduced him?'
't see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in a manner of speaking.'
'clock?'
'But I hope we shall get to know one another better. When we do, I hope you will explain what happened at the end of your song. For that little prank---'
'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.'
'Then your right name is Baggins?'
's any help I can give, you'
't take up with a Ranger.'
't know what the likes of me can do against, against---'
'll keep watch tonight; but you had best get some sleep, if you can.'
'd better send Nob to look for him. Good night to you all!'
'He deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he was going into great danger.'
'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in the night, and they were gone: not only Merry'
't suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy them,'
' But it appeared that he was nobody'
'I should like nothing better than to stay in your house in peace for a while.'
" He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down flat and began to melt on the spot.'
"He got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they took up with him. They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say."
'Oh have they? I'
'Now I won'
'Well, if you'
'Three and two,'
'Ah, that you haven'
'How long will that be?'
'Up away by Deadmen'
'Well, that sounds more hopeful, I'
'Does he now?'
'I hope so, I'
've come back!'
't many folk there this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by ourselves.'
'll do what I can.'
's my belief they let them in. On the night of the fight, I mean. And that was after we showed them the gates and pushed them out: before the year'
't go for armed folk, with swords and helmets and shields and all. Make them think twice, that would. And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.'
's been very disturbing, if you understand me.'
' strangers camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.'
's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.'
'And it will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.'
's been a comfort in trouble, I will say.'
'Nob, you slowcoach!'
'll be pleased.'
