'So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,'
'I'
'I'
'Good, good!'
'My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have a mind,'
'Perhaps not,'
'We'
'Well, what'
'That'
'No, more'
'Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that'
'Not exactly,'
'To Waymeet, that'
'Seems almost too easy after all, don'
'Why not now?'
'Thank'
'All right, Sam,'
'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,'
'The biggest ruffian o'
's household and all his guests were up early next morning. Nothing had been heard in the night, but more trouble would certainly come before the day was old. '
'Ah! This lot won'
'It'
't. He would have done something.'
'and far away. The way back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.'
's down South Lane! He always was a stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all friends of mine.'
's the chief person round here, and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.'
've been in foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.'
't stick at nothing. But come on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!'
't safe yet for them to be left all alone.'
'Hullo Rosie!'
't for these thieving ruffians.'
't let no one go near.'
's not above three hundred of them in the Shire all told, and maybe less. We can master them, if we stick together.'
've shot one or two of our folk.'
'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and robbing. After that the ruffians turned nastier. And they keep a pretty close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.'
't trouble about them just yet.'
're not wanted.'
' time, Mr. Merry.'
'But I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they spoke of, they might do a mischief up there before the morning.'
'll not have need to go near the old Hobbiton village over Water. My Jolly here will show you.'
'd already bought Sandyman'
's the real Chief now, I guess. All the ruffians do what he says; and what he says is mostly hack, burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s no longer even any bad sense in it. They cut down trees and let '
'but the gang from Waymeet will be along any time now.'
's got to be some fighting before this is settled, Mr. Frodo.'
'Well, I suppose it is time now that we dealt with the “Chief”.'
't know.'
't call it that.” Still I see what she means. I feel torn in two, as you might say.'
