'I have received this,'
'I see that strange tales are woven about you,'
'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,'
'Now tell me your tale, my liege,'
'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,'
'Would that have availed to change your judgement?'
'Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself,'
'And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?'
'Not enough, I deem,'
'You are weary, I see,'
'Much must be risked in war,'
'I do so,'
'That depends on the manner of your return,'
'Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you,'
'And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of time,'
'Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill news,'
'Comfort me not with wizards!'
'Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee?'
'He lies within,'
'He will not wake again,'
'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,'
'So!'
'My friends,'
'and little love do I bear the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and drew away my son on the wild errand to his death. My Boromir! Now we have need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.'
'and once again it is shown that looks may belie the man - or the halfling. I accept your service. For you are not daunted by words; and you have courteous speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. And we shall have need of all folk of courtesy, be they great or small, in the days to come. Swear to me now!'
'my first command to you: speak and be not silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that you can of Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!'
'and see that none trouble us for one hour.'
'For the words of one whom my son so befriended will be welcome indeed.'
'But indeed our case is desperate. My lord does not issue any command to you, he begs you only to remember old friendship and oaths long spoken, and for your own good to do all that you may. It is reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the East to the service of Mordor. From the North to the field of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour of war. In the South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on all our coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be decided, and if the tide be not stemmed there, then it will flow over all the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills there shall be no refuge.'
'But that I shall learn soonest, maybe, if I keep you beside me. The esquire of my chamber has begged leave to go to the out-garrison, so you shall take his place for a while. You shall wait on me, bear errands, and talk to me, if war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?'
'You would still have done just so, I deem. I know you well. Ever your desire is to appear lordly and generous as a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate hours gentleness may be repaid with death.'
'But not with your death only, Lord Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.'
'Have I not tasted it now many nights upon my tongue foreboding that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so! Would that this thing had come to me!'
'It is there that the first blow will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.'
'You have ridden fast and far, and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.'
'we should not lightly abandon the outer defences, the Rammas made with so great a labour. And the Enemy must pay dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in force to assail the City, either north of Cair Andros because of the marshes, or southwards towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats. It is at Osgiliath that he will put his weight, as before when Boromir denied him the passage.'
's will.'
'Nay, not yet, Master Peregrin! He will not come save only to triumph over me when all is won. He uses others as his weapons. So do all great lords, if they are wise, Master Halfling. Or why should I sit here in my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even my sons? For I can still wield a brand.'
'The fool'
'Better to burn sooner than late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to my pyre. To my pyre! No tomb for Denethor and Faramir. No tomb! No long slow sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like heathen kings before ever a ship sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!'
'But my life is broken. Send for my servants!'
'burning, already burning. They have set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The West has failed. It shall all go up in a great fire, and all shall be ended. Ash! Ash and smoke blown away on the wind!'
'Do not take my son from me! He calls for me.'
'Battle is vain. Why should we wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?'
's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will have naught: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.'
's love. Now thou stealest the hearts of my knights also, so that they rob me wholly of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy my will: to rule my own end.'
'Alas!'
'Tell me, lord,'
'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,'
`But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men'
's trust in me. What shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How shall I find them and save the Quest from disaster?'
