'Speed now, fair guests!'
'Hail, and well met at last!'
`Now we had better have it again,'
'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals'
'Ah, alas!'
'You may make a fire, if you can,'
`Yrch!'
'Orcs! '
`There is one of my people yonder across the stream,'
'Well,'
`And you? '
`Do you now wish to look, Frodo? '
`Ropes indeed! '
`They are made of hithlain,'
`Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,'
'I was sent from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the road.'
'Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.'
'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
`and I am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.'
'Never travel far without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are these. They may be a help in many needs.'
`but there is no time now to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas! unless you should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it serve you well! '
's thought again above his life in the wilderness as the leader of a petty company. But still Túrin would not return to Doriath; and Beleg yielding to his love against his wisdom remained with him, and did not depart, and in that time he laboured much for the good of Túrin'
's eyes; and Glaurung coiling back swiftly towered above him, and said: '
's daughter of Nargothrond. Then Dorlas, the leader of those woodmen, told the grievous tidings of her death. For the Men of Brethil had waylaid at the Crossings of Teiglin the Orc-host that led the captives of Nargothrond, hoping to rescue them; but the Orcs had at once cruelly slain their prisoners, and Finduilas they pinned to a tree with a spear. So she died, saying at the last: '
'Lament for the Two Trees'
'The Second People'
'You will now believe this at least: there is indeed a Dark Lord, and his spies and emissaries are among us; for he fears us, and the strength that we may give to his foes.'
'The vengeance of the house of Hador will find you yet!'
's lake is endless laughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and guarded from defilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty in ancient days.'
'Yet once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, until I went to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was enslaved in Angband.'
'And out of it the world was made. For Darkness alone is worshipful, and the Lord thereof may yet make other worlds to be gifts to those that serve him, so that the increase of their power shall find no end.'
'Men (in general)'
'and was not accounted among the Moriquendi'
'Star-lover'
'Golden-haired'
'of the Heavy Hand'
