'There is food in the wild,'
'No!'
'I will tell you the tale of Tinúviel,'
'There are evil things written on this hilt,'
`Where am I, and what is the time?'
`Good!'
`Still that must be expected,'
`You look splendid,'
'No,'
'Splendid!'
`Here,'
'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'
'Behold Isildur'
`That shall be told,'
`I had not named you,'
`You speak for me also,'
`The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,'
`We were all at fault,'
`Never before has any voice dared to utter the words of that tongue in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,'
'And now I will answer Galdor'
`I have not the strength,'
`But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any craft that we here possess,'
'None here can do so,'
'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,'
'At least for a while,'
`No indeed!'
`It'
'Yes,'
's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat and bowed. '
'There remain two more to be found,'
`That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what lies ahead,'
`Neither does Frodo,'
`Let it be so then. You shall go,'
'Maybe,'
`Or break it,'
'No,'
'It will be short of murder, I hope,'
`But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dáin'
'Here there are eight,'
'Ah! The Ring! '
's house!'
`It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want to know.'
's orders.'
's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.'
`The river of this valley is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into the water the flood was released. If I may say so, I added a few touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was afraid that we had let loose too fierce a wrath, and the flood would get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.'
`to learn what brings so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.'
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.'
' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo'
`Come along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.'
`is Boromir, a man from the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.'
`It recalled to me the glory of the Elder Days and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and captains were assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim was broken, and the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever, and it was not so.'
'I thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.'
`Isildur took it, as should not have been. It should have been cast then into Orodruin'
`Here is the Sword that was Broken!'
`But I do so now. Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into verse, you may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.'
`and but for your vigilance the Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!'
`neither have they.'
`And they who dwell beyond the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.'
`At least none can foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take. The westward road seems easiest. Therefore it must be shunned. It will be watched. Too often the Elves have fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. There lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into peril-to Mordor. We must send the Ring to the Fire.'
`For there are other powers and realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin the Great flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.'
`Some hope that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.'
`The road must be trod, but it will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far upon it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.'
' he said, `
`You at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from him, even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.'
's sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probably make quite a long stay here.'
`If the Ring is to set out, it must go soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?'
"These I will consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.'
`but I am in doubt. The Shire, I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought to send back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took, should remain. My heart is against his going.'
'Now the tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.'
'until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and dire need is on you.'
'The Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.'
`but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has not seen the nightfall.'
`Look not too far ahead! But go now with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!'
's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?'
't ever remember feeling so wretched.'
's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.'
"Don'
"I could not say,"
"A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!"
"Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see them,"
"What do they say?"
"Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks,"
"Then what is Durin'
"None to be seen by this moon,"
"It would be well indeed,"
"but one may guess that your trolls had plundered other plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold in the mountains of the North. I have heard that there are still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the mines of Moria, since the dwarf and goblin war."
' "
's eve in a crescent moon, a long while ago."
's Day will shine upon the key-hole."
's marauding feet, and there was some grass for their ponies. From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the sun began to sink towards the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley'
"but I fear that will not come about in this age of the world, or for many after."
"but I will take all the cure I can get. A second good night, fair friends!"
'The living have never used that road since the coming of the Rohirrim,'
'He should have been borne in honour into this city,'
'Here I must put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,'
'The King is come again indeed.'
's house. And they went down and crossed the bridge and came to the doors, and all the house was filled with light and song for joy at Elrond'
'I hear and see that you have used my gift well. The Shire shall now be more than ever blessed and beloved.'
'Star-dome'
'Rivendell'
'star-dome'
'No,'
'Galadriel! '
'Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really say.'
