'Yet a Halfling still,'
'It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,'
'Ah, there you lay your finger on the sore that many feel!'
'Nay,'
'Yes,'
'Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is his call!'
'Faramir!'
'Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale?'
'I parted with them in the morning two days ago,'
'Some twenty-five leagues as a bird flies,'
'If what I have done displeases you, my father,'
'So be it,'
'So be it!'
'Do you wish then,'
'If I had! If you had!'
'It is not strong,'
'There and elsewhere in many places,'
'Let us not speak of that!'
's head. '
'Gollum,'
'That was but a trial,'
'And what of Cair Andros?'
'Then farewell!'
'Do not throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,'
'Amroth for Gondor!'
'Faramir! Faramir!'
'Why? Why do the fools fly?'
'Do as you will, Master Halfling,'
'By your leave, lord!'
'Your master is not himself,'
'The Lord'
'He has,'
'Denethor has gone to the Tombs,'
'You may,'
's Door, and Beregond looked with grief at the porter. '
'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!'
'Alas! then I have guessed rightly,'
'He is come.'
'Wholesome verily,'
's hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick man'
'It is kingsfoil, Sir,'
'It will serve,'
'I will, lord,'
`Save me, but so I had!'
`Well, things are a bit better than you think,'
'Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo?'
'I do not rightly know,'
'What would you have me do, lady?'
'I myself am in the Warden'
'It is too late, lady, to follow the Captains, even if you had the strength,'
'Alas, not me, lord!'
'What do you look for, Éowyn?'
'Seven days,'
'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,'
'It reminds me of Númenor,'
'Yes,'
'No,'
'I would,'
'This is just a ceremony such as we have in the City, cousin; for he has already entered, as I was telling you; and he said to me-'
'In seven days we will go,'
' council and learn what I can. But the Enemy has the move, and he is about to open his full game. And pawns are likely to see as much of it as any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor. Sharpen your blade!'
's council before the noon-meal, and in no good mood either, I thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.'
'Brave heart! But how can he win to the Gate, if these foul hell-hawks have other weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate. No! the horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running on foot. No, one is still up, but he rides back to the others. That will be the Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!'
'Faramir!'
'For this is not the first halfling that I have seen walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.'
'It is fifteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they went straight south; and then they would be still five leagues westward of the accursed Tower. At swiftest they could not come there before today, and maybe they have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not due to their venture. It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow last night. It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left my keeping.'
'But I could not come more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle in the River northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the hither bank. As the dark drew on I knew that haste was needed, so I rode thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that I have not done ill?'
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement was thrust on me.'
'that our places had been exchanged?'
'I would ask you, my father, to remember why it was that I, not he, was in Ithilien. On one occasion at least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It was the Lord of the City that gave the errand to him.'
'What think you of the garrison at Osgiliath?'
'I have sent the company of Ithilien to strengthen it, as I have said.'
' And then he swayed and leaned upon his father'
'Where are the Riders of Rohan?'
'Today we may make the Enemy pay ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange. For he can afford to lose a host better than we to lose a company. And the retreat of those that we put out far afield will be perilous, if he wins across in force.'
'I do not oppose your will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what I can in his stead - if you command it.'
'But if I should return, think better of me!'
'You will be needed here, for other things than war. Your father loves you, Faramir, and will remember it ere the end. Farewell!'
'Will he come? Will he remember our old alliance?'
'Say not that he has fallen!'
'He can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.'
'dying'
'The house of his spirit crumbles.'
'I must find Gandalf. Poor Faramir! Quite likely he needs medicine more than tears. Oh, where can I find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to spare for dying men or madmen.'
'And as for orders, I think you have a madman to deal with, not a lord. I must run. I will return if I can.'
't you do something?'
'He is not dead, and they will burn him alive, if someone does not stop them.'
't you save Faramir?'
'But we have seen that light before, and it has long been rumoured in the City, that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.'
'Alas! if he should die. Would that there were kings in Gondor, as there were once upon a time, they say! For it is said in old lore: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer. And so the rightful king could ever be known.'
'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, and has the greater power.'
's hand in his, and laid the other hand upon the sick man'
'My lord, you called me. I come. What does the king command?'
'For who would lie idle when the king has returned?'
'he must soon learn that his father is dead. But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be told to him, until he is quite healed and has duties to do. See that Beregond and the perian who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!'
't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?'
've slashed up my water-bottle.'
's country, the day I saw an oliphaunt?'
'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'
'Nor have I yet taken up my authority in the City. But had I done so, I should still listen to his counsel, and should not cross his will in matters of his craft, unless in some great need.'
'But death in battle may come to us all yet, willing or unwilling. You will be better prepared to face it in your own manner, if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.'
'That can be amended. In this I will command the Warden. If you will stay in this house in our care, lady, and take your rest, then you shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; and you shall look east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east. It would ease my care, if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.'
'But think not ill of me, if I say to you: they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy to see you; but pain, because now the fear and doubt of this evil time are grown dark indeed. Éowyn, I would not have this world end now, or lose so soon what I have found.'
'of the land of Westernesse that foundered and of the great dark wave climbing over the green lands and above the hills, and coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.'
'It was but a picture in the mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells me that great evil has befallen and we stand at the end of days. But my heart says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that no reason can deny. Éowyn, Éowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not believe that any darkness will endure!'
'Éowyn, why do you tarry here, and do not go to the rejoicing in Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits you?'
'Do not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Éowyn! But I do not offer you my pity. For you are a lady high and valiant and have yourself won renown that shall not be forgotten; and you are a lady beautiful, I deem, beyond even the words of the Elven-tongue to tell. And I love you. Once I pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear or any lack, were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Éowyn, do you not love me?'
'No longer do I desire to be a queen,'
'for I am not a king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if she will, then let us cross the River and in happier days let us dwell in fair Ithilien and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there, if the White Lady comes.'
'Here is the Lady Éowyn of Rohan, and now she is healed.'
' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!'
's son of Númenor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell there?'
'By the labour and valour of many I have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer bring the crown to me, and let Mithrandir set it upon my head, if he will; for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his victory.'
'Now I must go back to my own land and look on it once again, and help my brother in his labour; but when one whom I long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.'
'is the friendship of the Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.'
`But we are neither,'
'Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand,'
'Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?'
'The words are known indeed,'
`That I see,'
`We must learn more of this,'
'The Halflings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,'
`But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would,'
'So! '
'The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to Minas Tirith! Great tidings! '
's mind came the memory of Boromir'
'I would grieve indeed,'
`I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,'
`Many indeed,'
'See here, Captain! '
`Patience!'
`You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,'
'Nay, it was not so,'
'I know not,'
'You passed through the Hidden Land,'
`For me there is no comfort in our speech together,'
'Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards,'
'I broke off our speech together,'
`I do not blame you,'
'I doubt it not,'
'Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,'
'Mithrandir was lost! '
'I see that there is some great tale of dread in this.'
`For myself,'
'Here, alas! I must do you a discourtesy,'
`It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,'
'Blindfold these guests,'
'At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you for your patience,'
'Well, here is our refuge,'
'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?'
`Perhaps,'
'That we do also,'
`Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with Mithrandir,'
`Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless, above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.'
`You don'
`No indeed, Master Samwise,'
'Then she must be lovely indeed,'
`Yes? Now Boromir you would say? '
`Now look here, sir! '
'So it seems,'
'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,'
`Did I so?'
'Maybe,'
`There is nothing to fear,'
`I will,'
`Shall we shoot? '
'You know, then, what this thing is? '
`He is lured here, you say? '
'He bore it? '
`Wait, Anborn,'
`Your guide! '
`Go then and be swift! '
'Away up there,'
`Nothing? '
'The price is not set on the fish,'
'Not very wise,'
'Come hither! '
`There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms behind them,'
`Are you satisfied? '
`Then I will declare my doom,'
`It is of great worth,'
'Then I say to you,'
`This I will not have secret,'
`There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,'
`Minas Morgul,'
`Do you know the name of that high pass? '
'It is called Cirith Ungol.'
'No other way? '
`Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,'
'Not wholly, perhaps,'
'No,'
`Nothing certain,'
`I would not have it so,'
`It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'
`May no hunger trouble you on the road,'
'I have no fitting gifts to give you at our parting,'
'Your guide must be blindfolded,'
'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.'
'Here is the last parting of our ways,'
'The storm has burst at last,'
`Then all the more need to fill our bottles,'
`Trapped in the end! '
`But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the Dark Tower, or of the White.'
'We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for riddling or parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? '
'You came with him? That is news indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!'
`It is some token of your truth that you also know them.'
's Bane? '
'But not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril. and you would not have gone far by field or road this day. There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you, for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.'
`Farewell!'
`I wish then to learn from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An orc-arrow slew Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty, and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom by Boromir of Gondor. Had you this thing in keeping? It is hidden, you say; but is not that because you choose to hide it? '
'Yes, I was his friend, for my part.'
`Then you would grieve to learn that Boromir is dead? '
`Do you mean that he is dead, and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?'
`and treachery not the least.'
'd got a new friend, he would.'
`Do not speak before your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach me of our peril. Even so, I spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago. For I am commanded to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor. But I do not slay man or beast needlessly, and not gladly even when it is needed. Neither do I talk in vain. So be comforted. Sit by your master, and be silent! '
'tis said. Boromir was my brother.'
'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,'
`Then maybe you can see it in your mind'
`Much that was strange about you I begin now to understand. Will you not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight of the land of his home.'
'For his works fill the heart with loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.'
'But whence came the boat? '
`but it seems that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with the Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood, then they may look for strange things to follow. For it is perilous for mortal man to walk out of the world of this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, '
`You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after this affray than it has been yet. And you cannot, I think, go far today in any case, for you are weary. And so are we. We are going now to a secret place we have, somewhat less than ten miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found it yet, and if they did, we could hold it long even against many. There we may lie up and rest for a while, and you with us. In the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.'
's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.'
's Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in your Company. Clearly it is a mighty heirloom of some sort, and such things do not breed peace among confederates, not if aught may be learned from ancient tales. Do I not hit near the mark?'
`If he were satisfied of Aragorn'
'and he was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf; to the East I go not.'
'An evil fate seems to have pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so great wisdom, and of power - for many wonderful things he did among us - could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? '
`which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach (and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among us of his end.'
's questioning. But it seemed then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us, did I think of Isildur'
"I hope you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you. But it is a command that no stranger, not even one of Rohan that fights with us, shall see the path we now go with open eyes. I must blindfold you.'
'But I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.'
`Securely, but not so as to discomfort them. Do not tie their hands. They will give their word not to try and see. I could trust them to shut their eyes of their own accord, but eyes will blink, if the feet stumble. Lead them so that they do not falter.'
`Let them see! '
`This is the Window of the Sunset, Henneth Annûn, fairest of all the falls of Ithilien, land of many fountains. Few strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. Enter now and see! '
`Not a place of great ease but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least, and there is food, though no fire. At one time the water flowed down through this cave and out of the arch, but its course was changed further up the gorge, by workmen of old, and the stream sent down in a fall of doubled height over the rocks far above. All the ways into this grot were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else, all save one. There are now but two ways out: that passage yonder by which you entered blindfold, and through the Window-curtain into a deep bowl filled with knives of stone. Now rest a while, until the evening meal is set.'
`But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'
`and not gone on to the fate that waited above the falls of Rauros.'
`Perilously fair.'
`What would you say? He took his peril with him? '
's a chance to show your quality.'
`So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring that was thought to have perished from the world. And Boromir tried to take it by force? And you escaped? And ran all the way - to me! And here in the wild I have you: two halflings, and a host of men at my call, and the Ring of Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune! A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, to show his quality! Ha!'
' asking, then you have pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep it hid and not to use it. You are a new people and a new world to me. Are all your kin of like sort? Your land must be a realm of peace and content, and there must gardeners be in high honour.'
'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.'
`Maybe you discern from far away the air of Númenor. Good night!'
`Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old Mindolluin. It is worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for you, Samwise, you were not brought, and do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! '
`Now what would you say that it is, Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the night-pools of Mirkwood? '
`Come, now you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window. Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he so?'
`Can he, does he then know of your burden? '
`This matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? '
`It is a less perilous hunger. Or maybe not: fish from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him all he has to give.'
`This is a harder matter than it seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? '
`The matter becomes ever stranger. I would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be caught by Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft? '
`If he comes off alive, he should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give me your bow.'
`Or the Precious will be angry. We are going back now, up the stream. Go on, go on, you go in front! '
`And bring the prisoner to me.'
'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of worse punishment? However, that is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight you have come where it is death to come. The fish of this pool are dearly bought.'
`Only to come here and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at the prayer of Frodo here, who says that of him at least you have deserved some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is your name? Whence do you come? And whither do you go? What is your business? '
'But just: yes perhaps, as just as our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! '
`Look at me! Do you know the name of this place? Have you been here before? '
`Never came here; never come again.'
`But in this I judge that you speak the truth. It is well for you. What oath will you swear never to return; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign?'
`I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he will do with you! '
`you have not yet declared your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made known, he cannot shape his plans for himself or his companions. Your judgement was postponed until the morning; but that is now at hand.'
`As for you, Frodo, in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you free in the realm of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this place unbidden. This doom shall stand for a year and a day, and then cease, unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and to make it lifelong. In the meantime, whomsoever you take under your protection shall be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor. Are you answered? '
'And now, do you take this creature, this Sméagol, under your protection? '
'you are under doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall fall. And may death find you swiftly, within Gondor or without, if you do not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his guide, he says. Whither were you leading him? '
`Answer me, or I will reverse my judgement! '
`Take this creature away, Anborn. Treat him gently, but watch him. And do not you, Sméagol, try to dive into the falls. The rocks have such teeth there as would slay you before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! '
`I do not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.'
'but malice eats it like a canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to any point on the borders of Gondor that he may name.'
`But my heart would. For it seems less evil to counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if one sees a friend bound unwitting to his own harm. But no - if he will go with you, you must now endure him. But I do not think you are holden to go to Cirith Ungol, of which he has told you less than he knows. That much I perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!'
'But at the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He has done murder before now. I read it in him.'
`You have little provision, but some small store of food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in your packs. You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien, but do not drink of any stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I must tell you. My scouts and watchers have all returned, even some that have crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find a strange thing. The land is empty. Nothing is on the road, and no sound of foot, or horn, or bowstring is anywhere to be heard. A waiting silence broods above the Nameless Land. I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If you are ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.'
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in the wild. The men of the White Mountains use them; though these have been cut down to your height and newly shod. They are made of the fair tree lebethron, beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor, and a virtue has been set upon them of finding and returning. May that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go!'
'but you and your servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.'
'If you take my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for thus you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes in long hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land dreams in a false peace, and for a while all evil is withdrawn. Fare you well, while you may!'
`This great array of spears and swords is going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He guessed it, but did he know the hour? And who can now hold the fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes? And other armies will come. I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will be no one I can tell. It will be in vain.'
's other hand was tightening on Sam'
