'Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!'
'No!'
's feet; and there was Tom'
'Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come from?'
'Well, here we are again at last!'
'We are making for the inn here,'
'Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem a good place to discuss them,'
'Can we-'
'He did,'
'I don'
'What about?'
'A matter of some importance - to us both,'
'Very well,'
'Of course there'
'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,'
'You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,'
'What do you mean?'
'And what will that be, pray?'
'No more than you can afford,'
'Oh, indeed!'
'Go on then!'
'Do you think he---'
'It was sheer accident!'
'Hardly more than it was already,'
'What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with him?'
'And what has that got to do with me?'
'Indeed! Let'
'He said it? And who was he?'
'A letter for me from Gandalf!'
'It is,'
'What do you mean?'
'He'
'Well, we can only hope the Riders won'
'In any case we must be called at dawn,'
'When did you last see Gandalf?'
'Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it - with Gandalf'
'Black Riders!'
'We seem to have enemies all round,'
'Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,'
'Bill Ferny?'
'I hope we shall meet again some day, when things are merry once more,'
'What do you mean?'
'What do you advise us to do?'
'Very odd,'
'I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they may mean,'
'A fortnight!'
'Is there no escape then?'
'I don'
'Did you see anything?'
'Look!'
's account of his journey and the threatening towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Troll'
'The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,'
'That does not sound like a Black Rider'
'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?'
'No, he will not!'
'I doubt very much,'
'By Elbereth and Lúthien the Fair,'
`Gandalf!'
`What happened at the Ford?'
'You seem to know a great deal already,'
'We should never have done it without Strider,'
`But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are quite as tiring,'
'You?'
'I suppose not,'
'I don'
'Days?'
`What would they have done to me?'
'Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!'
`I know,'
'I haven'
'And is that the end of the Black Riders?'
`Who made the flood?'
`Yes, it all comes back to me now,'
`Dear Bilbo!'
`Hullo, Sam!'
'I am ready,'
'I know what you have been doing, Sam,'
`I feel like singing myself,'
`Thank you very much,'
'I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,'
'And what of your own people?'
'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Óin?'
`Yes,'
'Awake little master. he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. '
`Bilbo!'
'Why weren'
`Yes, I'
`Strider!'
`And why do you call him Dúnadan?'
`I am not going to try and guess,'
'I don'
`Can we?'
`I feel ready for anything,'
`Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!'
'Well told, my friend,'
`I saw you!'
`What did you do to him?'
`Rewards!'
'Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,'
`It will do well, if it ever comes to that,'
'The time has come,'
`Strider!'
'Yes,'
`I should look - well, I don'
'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all our past kindnesses,'
`Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,'
`And then where are we to go? '
'What does the writing say?'
'Why did you do that, Boromir? '
`I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my foot first touched the water,'
`Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing, since we can'
'How long is that going to take us? '
'He is dead then,'
'I am all right,'
`What about me? '
'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,'
'I am all right,'
`No! '
's right side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo'
's face, and Sam'
`What is it? '
`Yes,'
'No, I am afraid not,'
'You can see and feel it everywhere,'
'What shall we look for, and what shall we see? '
`And I'
`I wish I had never come here, and I don'
`Do you advise me to look? '
'No,'
'You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,'
`How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '
`It wasn'
`The log'
`I might,'
'What is it? '
`Gollum,'
'It was not a Balrog,'
`I think - No, I will not say,'
`Why are you waking? '
`Why? '
'I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,'
'No hope while the Ring lasts,'
'Were you not at the Council? '
'Surely you see it, my friend?'
'No, I am afraid,'
`You misunderstand me,'
`No! no! '
'What have I said? '
`Where have you been, Boromir? '
`Up you come, Sam my lad! '
'It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,'
`Now, Sam,'
"but they are not to go any further. It’s mine anyway."
's feet; and there was Tom'
't want to speak of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!'
'We are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.'
'Old Barliman here'
'a few suitable words'
'You may hear something to your advantage.'
'll talk to you later.'
've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.'
'It was quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.'
'What have you to say?'
'Just this: you must take me along with you, until I wish to leave you.'
'Even if I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such thing, until I knew a good deal more about you, and your business.'
'What do you know?'
'I knew these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed me and to have gone away.'
's no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some dark place far from help, as he puts it.'
've taken a long time to come to the point.'
'He came to offer me his help.'
's a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house. These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from---'
'We must get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.'
'or at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight, but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.'
'What are we to do?'
'We should not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I was going to walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count on getting anything to eat between here and Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to take plenty to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your backs?'
'considering that there is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will not go on indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.'
'There seems to he a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,'
'It would be a great comfort to know that he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.'
'A lot may happen in that time.'
'If I move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!'
'We have been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks still to go, and perhaps more.'
' he asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for a while; nor did they understand his question. At length he gathered from Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He heard Frodo'
'The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King. More deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.'
'It was this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what I can.'
'and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, Sam!'
'We are forgetting our family history! These must be the very three that were caught by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.'
's shoulder with his fingers, and his face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down from his shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk of evening seemed to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been withdrawn. He saw his friends'
'I shall not ride him, if I am to be carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind in danger.'
's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the horse'
' at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to his arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the soft puffs of Gandalf'
`It all seemed so dim somehow; and it still does.'
`I have not spoken to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?'
`But we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.'
'I am wide awake now, and I remember so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You ought to tell me that at least.'
`it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid of him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we met Glorfindel.'
`I thought they had all vanished long ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.'
't have to go any further. It is very pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has been as much as I want.'
'I can move my arm again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,'
`What were the Riders trying to do?'
`They were terrible to behold! But why could we all see their horses?'
't be able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.'
'the tremendous roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and all. But now we are safe!'
`It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorfindel and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much trouble and show me so much kindness.'
's go and look for the rest of the party!'
`Though at the moment I feel more like eating and drinking!'
'And I do not ask, for I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir of our friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.'
'How surprised Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!'
'I would rather see him than all the towers and palaces in the world.'
't I been allowed to see you before?'
`It looks just the same as ever it did.'
`You seem to have a lot of names.'
't often get asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it?'
't understand that it was really you speaking until near the end.'
`But most of all I should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like to get into those pine-woods up there.'
`for the Dúnadan, a long time ago when he first told me about himself. I almost wish that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.'
'But the story still does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal, especially about Gandalf.'
`You were walking backwards and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.'
'He was really very kind to us and did all that he could.'
't imagine a more severe punishment. You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.'
`I will go with Sam.'
'only I thought you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.'
'I thought I knew the elf-letters but I cannot read these.'
'What was the thing, or were there many of them? '
`I feared it was so.'
`I can walk. Put me down! '
'I am alive, and whole I think. I am bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.'
`though I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.'
`I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zâram.'
`So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.'
`All I needed was some food and a little rest.'
's right side and breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo'
'I thought I heard feet, and I thought I saw a light-like eyes. I have thought so often, since we first entered Moria.'
`What are they doing? '
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.'
`but whatever came into my mind then I will keep there.'
'But that is the best I can do yet.'
' said Sam. `
't understand.'
`And what do you wish? '
`a thing which I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts of those that wear them? '
`I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.'
't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with eyes! '
`There are many in the River. But leave out the eyes! '
`Ever since the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lórien would throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off! '
". You shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me halfway towards morning, if nothing happens before then.'
`I felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? '
'Or at least, so I guess.'
'I did not know that we had come so far: Anduin flows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir must be close at hand already.'
's hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry'
'It was something colder. I think it was -'
`Whatever it was, its fall has dismayed our enemies.'
`It is not your watch.'
`Are enemies at hand? '
`Not very near, and yet too near, it seems.'
`I fear that the burden is laid upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.'
`I know that haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone! '
`If Aragorn is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy. May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together may perhaps find wisdom.'
'But I do not think that any speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid of doing it, Boromir: afraid.'
`Because we cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.'
`You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should pardon you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?'
'Simply afraid. But I am glad to have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.'
'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.'
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! '
'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave them before it does more harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust, and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone. At once.'
'm coming with you.'
't come like this without your gear or food or anything.'
'Sleep again, and do not be afraid!'
'You do not comfort me,'
'The Paths of the Dead,'
'Tell me,'
'I cannot answer that now,'
'The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway,'
'I'
's company had seemed to be about forty, and Gorbag'
`Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear!'
`I can hardly believe it,'
's forehead. `
'There'
`Only that?'
`You won'
`Yes, I can walk,'
`Yes, they quarrelled, seemingly,'
`They'
`No, not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it hasn'
`You'
`No, no!'
'O Sam!'
'That'
's shoulders. Then unslinging his pack he laid it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon its blade. `
`Take care, Sam!'
`There'
`The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag'
'What about you, Sam?'
'I can'
`Well, there'
'Not till you'
'Aiya elenion ancalima!'
'This won'
'Quick, Sam! Over we go!'
'Orc-mail doesn'
'Now down we go, Sam,'
'Don'
'Well I never!'
'Look here, Sam dear lad,'
'Don'
'You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,'
'What did I tell you? Something'
'Well no, not much, Sam,'
's quick spirits sank again at once. He looked at his master anxiously, and he took his hand. '
'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!'
'This is where we turn aside, Sam,'
'I must rest now, Sam, and sleep if I can.'
'Still we shall have to try,'
'I guess what it'
'I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far,'
'Quietly, Sam,'
'Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew,'
's ear all that he could find words for of Gollum'
'No, not any clear notion, Sam,'
'That'
'I'
'We have come to a dead end, Sam,'
'All right, Sam,'
's head. Frodo was too weary to debate the matter, and Sam did not tell him that he had drunk the last drop of their water, and eaten Sam'
'Well, luck did not let me down,'
'That Gollum'
'Bless you, Sam!'
'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own,'
'I feared it, Sam,'
'Seems so,'
' he muttered gloomily staring at the threatening mountain, '
'I can manage it,'
'I'
'I understand,'
'No, I am afraid not, Sam,'
'I'
'I didn'
'Now for it! Now for the last gasp!'
'Come, Mr. Frodo!'
'Now, now, or it will be too late!'
'Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee,'
'Yes,'
'I am glad that you are here with me,'
'Yes, I am with you, Master,'
'Maybe not, Sam,'
'Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous place here, from this Crack of Doom, if that'
'Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I'
's hand caressed it. He sighed. '
'Bless me!'
'How do I feel?'
'Yes, I am all right otherwise,'
'The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,'
'What have you got there?'
'Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam when you were rescued. The Lady Galadriel'
'I do not wish for any sword,'
'Weeks indeed,'
'Pippin,'
'It is true that I wish to go back to the Shire,'
'Then I beg leave to depart soon,'
'I would, if I had any,'
'I'
'Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea,'
'Well, if you must go, you must,'
'Think of me when you smoke them!'
'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,'
'I don'
'You see, I am getting so sleepy,'
'Of course I'
'Are you in pain, Frodo?'
'Well, yes I am,'
'I fear it may be so with mine,'
'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,'
'Not to me,'
'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?'
'Chief'
'What'
'And what else?'
'Don'
'I won'
'All right,'
'Look here, Cock-robin!'
'He won'
'I'
'And what may that be?'
'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,'
'A beggar in the wilderness!'
'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,'
'I don'
'Fight?'
'That I ain'
'Well, be off with you!'
'I can'
'All the same,'
'Very good,'
'I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee,'
'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'
'Don'
'Yes, this is Mordor,'
'I did not,'
'Well, if that is what you find pleasure in,'
'No, Sam!'
'Wormtongue!'
'I hope so,'
's arm but still clutching her umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never in her life been popular before. But she was crushed by the news of Lotho'
'I wondered when you would think of it,'
'Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,'
'There is no need to come yet, if you don'
'I see,'
'What'
'Well, Mr. Frodo,'
'Well, Sam,'
'I suppose you'
'You'
'Well, Sam,'
'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid,'
'I have quite finished, Sam,'
'If that isn'
'Yes, I am coming,'
'To the Havens, Sam,'
's errand. I will deal with that in due time. And say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.'
'And yet they are more important than all the rest of us. And I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away, if they are still alive.'
'm coming, Mr. Frodo!'
'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.'
's my job to go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.'
've come!'
't dreaming after all when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?'
'd given up hope, almost. I couldn'
' he said, trying to sound as cheerful as he had when he drew back the curtains at Bag End on a summer'
`Where are we? How did I get here?'
't know. More than a day, I guess.'
'll never forget their claws and eyes.'
't want to see them again, the sooner we get going the better. Can you walk?'
've a pain here.'
't escape. Only Elves can escape. Away, away out of Middle-earth, far away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.'
`But I suppose you must take it back.'
't have it!'
's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?'
't, you thief!'
't come between me and this doom.'
'd best match. Now put this round you!'
't have to go far.'
`And be quick! There may be orcs still alive, lurking in wait.'
'll call. What the Elves say. No orc would say that.'
't be seen.'
're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.'
't we going to match?'
'll just have to cover up.'
've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or have you forgotten about food and drink?'
't do us any good!'
't come.'
's come over me.'
't be more dangerous than before. Now for it!'
's a sheer drop over the wall. Follow me!'
'If we were real orcs, we ought to be dashing back to the Tower, not running away. The first enemy we meet will know us. We must get off this road somehow.'
'Good-bye!'
'put that mail-shirt on!'
'Not even a leather jerkin is any good.'
'Down into the valley quick, and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.'
's time we made another effort.'
'm ungrateful. I hate to think of the foul work you must have had among the bodies to find it for me.'
'd carry you on my back, if I could. Let it go then!'
've caught a chill.'
'll keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by the Lady.'
't see them now.'
's a long way to Lórien.'
'I can feel it. We had better keep still for a while.'
's passed,'
's not having it all his own way. His darkness is breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!'
't you got some hope now?'
'm so tired. And the Ring is so heavy, Sam. And I begin to see it in my mind all the time, like a great wheel of fire.'
' food; it may hearten you.'
'I have just about enough strength left to find some hole away up there. And then I must rest a little.'
'I must rest now, Sam, and sleep if I can.'
's getting dark again. I reckon this day is nearly over.'
's hand; and there he sat silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled from the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking and cracking and sly noises, but there was no sound of voice or of foot. Far above the Ephel Dúath in the West the night-sky was still dim and pale. There, peeping among the cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as he looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him. For like a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing: there was light and high beauty for ever beyond its reach. His song in the Tower had been defiance rather than hope; for then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment, his own fate, and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled back into the brambles and laid himself by Frodo'
've still got to do the best I can. At present that is to avoid being captured as long as possible. So we must still go northwards, I think, and see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.'
't get much hope out of it. They hate us far more, altogether and all the time. If those two had seen us, they would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.'
't I?'
'Well come now! I think we had better not move out from here again, until it has gone quite dark. So you shall tell me how you know, and all about what happened. If you can do it quietly.'
's treacherous attack, the horror of Shelob, and his own adventures with the orcs. When he had finished, Frodo said nothing but took Sam'
'but have you any notion how far there is still to go?'
'In Rivendell before I set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came back here; but I only remember it vaguely. I remember clearest that there was a place in the north where the western range and the northern range send out spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge back by the Tower. It might be a good point at which to cross. But of course, if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, sixty miles from it, I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve leagues north from the bridge now. Even if all goes well, I could hardly reach the Mountain in a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the burden will get very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.'
' waybread.'
's start another march!'
't climb up westward, or climb down eastward.'
've got to make a dash for it!'
'll just plod along after you.'
'll get no further.'
't hold up my lids much longer.'
's caught himself.'
's a bottle full of water. Drink up. We can fill it again when we go on.'
're trapped at last!'
'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,'
'One more crawl, and then you can lie still.'
's a chance. Can you manage it?'
'I must.'
't quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.'
't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.'
're not sure to need.'
't need much on that road. And at its end nothing.'
'At least, I know that such things happened, but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, no sound of wind, no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or star are left to me. I am naked in the dark. Sam, and there is no veil between me and the wheel of fire. I begin to see it even with my waking eyes, and all else fades.'
't.'
'll go.'
'How far is there to go?'
'Now, now, or it will be too late!'
's all up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is the end of ends.'
's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled off along the climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it had looked at first. By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the road on this side was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled away or was crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward fox a space. There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain'
'Farewell, Sam! This is the end at last. On Mount Doom doom shall fall. Farewell!'
's words: Even Gollum may have something yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed the Ring. The Quest would have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let us forgive him! For the Quest is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.'
'Here at the end of all things, Sam.'
's not like me, somehow, if you understand.'
's like things are in the world. Hopes fail. An end comes. We have only a little time to wait now. We are lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.'
's go down the path at any rate!'
'll say: Now comes the story of Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then everyone will hush, like we did, when in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the Great Jewel. I wish I could hear it! And I wonder how it will go on after our part.'
's had a cruel time.'
'Can it be - ?'
'm still asleep!'
'Sting I gave to you Sam,'
's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies. And when I heaved that great carcase off you, I made sure you were dead. I could have. torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.'
't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my home.'
't you say that Gandalf was less close than of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.'
'At last I understand why we have waited! This is the ending. Now not day only shall be beloved, but night too shall be beautiful and blessed and all its fear pass away!'
'But first I must go to Rivendell. For if there could be anything wanting in a time so blessed, I missed Bilbo; and I was grieved when among all the household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.'
'this will bring you aid.'
't go any quicker, if we are to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.'
'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth.'
'Except the Sea.'
'I think I shall come too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.'
'I got rid of it, you know.'
't ever write our story now.'
't be too critical.'
't be dangerous any more. There is a real king now and he will soon put the roads in order.'
' said Gandalf quietly as he rode by Frodo'
'It is my shoulder. The wound aches, and the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.'
'There is no real going back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall not be the same. I am wounded with knife, sting, and tooth, and a long burden. Where shall I find rest?'
'I wonder how he is getting on?'
'To me it feels more like falling asleep again.'
'Well, I am glad he has dropped the Baggins at any rate. But it is evidently high time that the family dealt with him and put him in his place.'
'I am going where I please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.'
'll be obliged.'
'll follow.'
's all this about the inn being closed?'
's own country, and they found out now that they cared about it more than any other place in the world. Many of the houses that they had known were missing. Some seemed to have been burned down. The pleasant row of old hobbit-holes in the bank on the north side of the Pool were deserted, and their little gardens that used to run down bright to the water'
's up. I want to find my gaffer.'
'I am on my way to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.'
'll take notice, perhaps.'
'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.'
's a prisoner in Bag End now, I expect, and very frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.'
' orders because they are frightened. No hobbit has ever killed another on purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed at all, if it can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands to the last possible moment!'
're starting now.'
'd have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.'
'you want to leave him for, as soon as things look dangerous?'
'until I know more. How many of these ruffians are there?'
'I wish for no killing; not even of the ruffians, unless it must be done, to prevent them from hurting hobbits.'
'You make the arrangements.'
'll do my best to make amends.'
' Sam blushed, but he looked gratefully at Frodo, for Rosie'
'I hope there are not many more hobbits that have become like this. It would be a worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.'
'Just one of its works. Saruman was doing its work all the time, even when he thought he was working for himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.'
'Sharkey!'
'I pity you. It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!'
'Do not believe him! He has lost all power, save his voice that can still daunt you and deceive you, if you let it. But I will not have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!'
'Do not kill him even now. For he has not hurt me. And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was great once, of a noble kind that we should not dare to raise our hands against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us; but I would still spare him, in the hope that he may find it.'
'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel. You have robbed my revenge of sweetness, and now I must go hence in bitterness, in debt to your mercy. I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will trouble you no more. But do not expect me to wish you health and long life. You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.'
'The very last stroke. But to think that it should fall here, at the very door of Bag End! Among all my hopes and fears at least I never expected that.'
'Open it!'
'and then use the gift to help your work and better it. And use it sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.'
'When are you going to move in and join me, Sam?'
'But you know the Gaffer is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after by Widow Rumble.'
's room enough in Bag End for as big a family as you could wish for.'
't know what to do.'
's wrong with the old customs? Choose a flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such names, and what could be better?'
't trouble about the length: it must be a beautiful flower, because, you see, I think she is very beautiful, and is going to be beautifuller still.'
'Well, Sam, what about elanor, the sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlórien?'
's what I wanted.'
't go far or for a long time now, of course,'
'And yet the only place I really want to be in is here. I am that torn in two.'
'But you will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.'
's thin wandering hand; but most of it was written in Frodo'
'Well, you have kept at it, I must say.'
'The last pages are for you.'
'It seems like a dream now.'
's settled. And now I think I am quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?'
'The Ring-bearers should go together.'
'This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!'
'I read the signs aright,'
'The hobbits!'
'The Orcs have been on this ground,'
'Two packs are missing.'
'And a brave deed,'
'He fled, certainly,'
'Well, so much at least is now clear,'
'Our choice then,'
'Let me think!'
'And tonight he is shrouded anyway,'
'No hope of escape!'
'Well, master, we'
'Yes, I can smell it,'
'I wonder,'
'Only those, what d'
'No,'
'I hope you'
'So do I,'
`There'
`It would be a big jump still,'
`All the same,'
'You? '
'No, no! Sam, you old ass! '
'Climb back, I suppose,'
`No! Not if I can help it,'
`What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do? '
`No, no! wait! '
`Stop chattering!'
`I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,'
`A pity I didn'
'Who'
`Thirty ells! '
`The rain'
'And I'
`It'
`It does look sort of silver in the dark,'
's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `
`If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope and yet brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyhammer, or any other name your Gaffer gave you,'
`Then the rope must have broken - frayed on the rock-edge, I expect,'
'Then I'
'It certainly came,'
'Yes,'
'I suppose so,'
'Well! '
`I don'
'Quietly, Sam! '
`Careful!'
`Hsh! '
`No,'
'I daresay,'
'No, we won'
`So you have been there? '
`He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Sméagol,'
`Perhaps we'
'Get up! '
`Now! '
`Then sit down,'
`All we need is something to keep a hold on him,'
`No, I will not take it off you,'
`Swear? '
'Sméagol,'
`And what would you swear? '
`To be very very good,'
'No! not on it,'
'Down! down! '
'Take the rope off, Sam!'
`We should be glad to see the Sun;'
`We must take a little food,'
`No, we have got no fish,'
`I'
'Look here! '
'Perhaps you'
`Don'
`I don'
'How do we shape our course now, Sméagol? '
`All right,'
`Who are they? What are they? '
'I don'
`I feel sick,'
'I did,'
'I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,'
'Another way! '
'I did not mean the danger that we all share,'
's threat had quite unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `
`No! '
`That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built '
'What does he not hate? '
'Not nice hobbit, not sensible,'
'What did you find? '
'Is it not guarded? '
'Is it not guarded? '
'No, perhaps not,'
'Good master, wise master, nice master!'
`About a couple of hours after daybreak,'
`And then you must take some sleep,'
`That won'
`Hush! '
'Not Orcs,'
'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell? '
`Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,'
`That is hidden,'
'Farewell!'
`I wonder where that dratted Gollum is? '
`It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,'
's aid if needed. He could see Faramir'
's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur'
'No, not because I choose,'
'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,'
'Alas!'
`It is beautiful,'
'No more can I say than I have said,'
`From Lórien,'
'No, I did not know of it,'
`I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,'
`Near,'
'It does,'
'The Grey Pilgrim? '
'Alas! yes,'
'Neither did the Council,'
`As you will,'
`No,'
`He was the last,'
'Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,'
`Sam! '
`Not all is well there,'
'Is it morning already? '
's ear alone as he thought: '
'There are two answers, I think,'
`Fish,'
`The creature is wretched and hungry,'
`Let me go down quietly to him,'
`Go on! '
'Come, Sméagol! '
`There'
'Sméagol! '
`Yes, we'
`Easy, easy! '
`Got him?'
'Now, Sméagol! '
`Master knows,'
`Yes,'
'But, Lord Faramir,'
`I do take Sméagol under my protection,'
`I will answer for him,'
`Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road '
`I do not know clearly,'
'No,'
'No, not altogether wicked,'
`He would not take it,'
`Where then shall I go? '
'But where else will you direct me? '
'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find. And there is no time for long searching,'
`Most gracious host,'
`Yes, let us go,'
`Which way do we go from here?'
`Haven'
'No it isn'
'I don'
`No,'
`You forget the Marshes,'
'I think we are in for trouble anyhow,'
'Maybe,'
`Silly! '
'They mustn'
'They cannot conquer for ever!'
`Hold up, Mr. Frodo! '
`I must rest a while, Sam,'
`Sssh! ssh! '
'All right,'
's voice speaking. `
'Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They'
'Perhaps,'
`Yes, we must rest,'
'Yes, they drink,'
'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,'
'I don'
'Yes, that'
`I wonder,'
'No, they never end as tales,'
'And then we can have some rest and some sleep,'
`So was I,'
`It'
`No, I don'
`Well, I suppose you'
'Very likely he can'
`We haven'
`Sleep!'
'Sorry.'
`I think we shall get tired of that word soon,'
'Yes it'
'Don'
'Come, let it pass then,'
`Is this the only way, Sméagol? '
'Well,'
`Sméagol! '
'This can'
`The star-glass?'
`Galadriel! '
`No, not to be seen,'
'That would not help us now,'
`Come! '
`Frodo, Mr. Frodo! '
's body in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting challenges. Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo'
'If I'
'But you haven'
`How many are there?'
'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.'
'A hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I cannot say how long ago.'
'How do things go with him?'
`we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more sheltered spot, and camp once more; and perhaps another day will show us a path.'
't know what is to be done. What food have we got left?'
've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last camp, and what use has it been? Naught to make a fire with, for a start; and naught to cook, not even grass!'
've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights now.'
't leave many footprints, nor much scent, even for his snuffling nose.'
've got to get down today somehow.'
's see what it leads to!'
`about eighteen fathoms I should guess. Not more.'
`I think we could climb here; and I think we shall have to try. See - the rock is quite different from what it was a few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.'
'm going to try it,'
's made you change your mind about climbing?'
`I could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your head and followed me carefully.'
't you follow till I come back or call!'
't do anything without a rope.'
'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself you'
'd clean forgotten it!'
'What a piece of luck you had that rope!'
`but I left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only we had enough we could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?'
'm going to try it.'
's over.'
`Do you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight? From the lightning or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.'
's no more than your guess at the height of the cliff.'
'll follow. I feel quite myself again now.'
'm down! '
`Climb up and untie it and let yourself down, if you want to!'
`A good thing it held as long as it did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!'
's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over by Tighfield many a year. And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as any one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.'
`but I think the rope came off itself - when I called.'
've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful the stars are, and the Moon!'
'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.'
'd go on till my legs gave way.'
`Look over there on the cliff!'
't like Sun or Moon.'
`He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something now: our voices probably. We did a lot of shouting away back there; and we were talking far too loudly until a minute ago.'
's much more dangerous than he looks.'
's getting near now, near enough to hear a whisper.'
't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.'
`But what he means to do is another matter.'
's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.'
`We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, I believe.'
't you?'
`But if you really wish to be free of him again. then you must help me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.'
'll start tonight.'
't move!'
's no good tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to use them nearly as much. Tie one end to his ankle, and keep a grip on the other end.'
't wish to hurt you.'
`not unless there is any promise you can make that I can trust.'
'Sméagol will swear on the Precious.'
' he said. '
'Sméagol will swear never, never, to let Him have it. Never! Sméagol will save it. But he must swear on the Precious.'
'All you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, though you know it would drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it, if you will. For you know where it is. Yes, you know, Sméagol. It is before you.'
`Now speak your promise!'
`but we will stay here: we are too tired to go any further at present.'
`Are you hungry, Sméagol? We have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.'
'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.'
't wash the smell off his hands, my nice hands.'
't even try, not yet anyway.'
's loose.'
't think there is any need for fear - at present. Still watch if you wish. Give me about two hours, not more, and then call me.'
's mind, drawn from the Gaffer'
's the time?'
't leave his Precious, anyway.'
'You were worn out, and it has turned out well: we are now both rested. And we have a hard road ahead, the worst road of all.'
`We were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, my dear hobbit - indeed, Sam my dearest hobbit, friend of friends - I do not think we need give thought to what comes after that. To do the job as you put it - what hope is there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If we can nurse our limbs to bring us to Mount Doom, that is all we can do. More than I can, I begin to feel.'
'Must we cross these evil-smelling fens? '
's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as we can - if we can! '
'm coming. Go on! '
'I know not who they are; but I thought I saw there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.'
`I said so, because I purpose to enter Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I do not ask anyone to go with me.'
'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after must come.'
'There is another way. O yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, more difficult to find, more secret. But Sméagol knows it. Let Sméagol show you! '
'I mean a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago. If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!'
`Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.'
`poor little Sméagol'
`But do not wander from your road. What of the third turning? '
'But what has the Tower of the Moon to do with us? '
's here in the North that the big danger is for Him, and for us. He will come out of the Black Gate one day, one day soon. That is the only way big armies can come. But away down west He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.'
`And did you escape out of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depart upon an errand? That at least is w hat Aragorn thought, who found you by the Dead Marshes some years ago.'
'escape'
's guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little halfling from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where the great ones could not go, or dared not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that it was like a chapter in a story of the world'
`But their steeds could see. And these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see more than any other creature. They are like great carrion birds. They are looking for something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.'
`What is that?'
's all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.'
`Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits, under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft and quick as shadows we must be!'
`something hot out of the pot'
's like that, and sometimes it shines through, somehow. But I love him, whether or no.'
'm going to wake him up.'
't brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.'
'And lighting a fire was dangerous in these parts. But I do feel hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? '
`I thought I heard voices.'
`And travellers we are, whatever Captain Faramir may say.'
'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.'
`Doubtless it will be made clear in time.'
`Think what you will, I am a friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if we halfling folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!'
're as near as I want them now.'
's account of himself at several points: what part he had to play in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir; and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur'
`It does not belong to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any could claim it, it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn, whom I named, the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros.'
`Indeed, if Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since he was already at Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you return, you may soon learn the answers there. My part in the Company was known to him, as to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris himself before the whole Council. On that errand I came into this country, but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company. Yet those who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.'
's no right to talk to you so. After all you'
'That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was that clothed us as you see us, in elven-grey. This brooch is of the same workmanship.'
`Though your tale fills me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I think, and no more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so by his foul arts.'
'For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol Brandir; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools, though laden with water? '
'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.'
'To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. But not here or now. maybe. But lest you still should think my tale a vision, I will tell you this. The horn of Boromir at least returned in truth, and not in seeming. The horn came, but it was cloven in two, as it were by axe or sword. The shards came severally to shore: one was found among the reeds where watchers of Gondor lay, northwards below the infalls of the Entwash; the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, '
`there is something strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to Denethor, and my life will justly be forfeit, if I now choose a course that proves ill for my city. So I will not decide in haste what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.'
'but not in the gold. There was no contention in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from the Emyn Muil. But be that as it may, ancient tales teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as - heirlooms.'
's Bane. Forgive me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But even as I spoke with you, I drew nearer to the mark, and so deliberately shot wider. For you must know that much is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil. though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king'
`Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.'
'I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.'
`I saw him fall into the abyss.'
'Nor do I. I would have nothing to do with such matters.'
'Even the Elves do likewise at need, and blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli the dwarf took it ill, but the hobbits endured it.'
`But if we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we rise and thank him.'
's fall. But had there not been us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.'
`For I would learn more of Minas Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope have you for that city in your long war? '
`but certainly gardeners are honoured.'
's going on? '
`Yes,'
`For one thing, he knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.'
`Look! '
`and unaware of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my guide.'
`You may keep your bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.'
`Have a care to your right. If you fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.'
`We are in danger. Men will kill you, if they find you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death. Come to Master!'
`Bring fish with you. Come! '
'Precious will be angry. I shall take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and choke. Never taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! '
`But not at once. I will go with you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.'
'll go with you, and you shall come to no harm. Not unless they kill me too. Trust Master! '
`Got him?'
' He cut the cords on Gollum'
`Sméagol promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no never! No, precious, no!'
'At least, you must either accept this promise or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came to me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.'
`and I place myself at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.'
`He brought me to the Black Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.'
'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas Ithil.'
`but the path climbs, I think, up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the old city stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to - that which is beyond.'
'He would follow after me as he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him under my protection and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with him?'
`Back to the Black Gate and deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this place that makes its name so dreadful? '
'You cannot yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over the mountains I am bound, by solemn undertaking to the Council, to find a way or perish in the seeking. And if I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where then shall I go among Elves or Men? Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing, the Thing that drove your brother mad with desire? What spell would it work in Minas Tirith? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul, grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? '
'it was said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret and unlooked for. Certainly I looked for no such friendship as you have shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.'
'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm is meant.'
`Well, now for it again!'
`But if you can only speak ill of those who showed you mercy, keep silent! '
`Is that the opening of-of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?'
's the time? Seems to be getting late!'
've only slept for about three hours.'
's been going on for a good while now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.'
's not been a sign or sound of him.'
`I hope nothing has happened to him.'
'm afraid our journey is drawing to an end.'
`Look! The king has got a crown again!'
't stand here. Make haste!'
'Come back! Not that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.'
's heavy on me, Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I must rest before we venture on to that.'
't stay here.'
`I will try.'
's staring eyes followed him, unable to wink or to withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead his ghastly host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king whose cold hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo'
're gone,'
's something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a seeing mind, if you take me; and the longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! '
`This is no place to sit in.'
've kept going for hours and hours.'
'Let us find some corner out of the wind, and gather our strength-for the last lap.'
'But do not let us speak of that. Such drink is not for us.'
`step or stone, breath or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.'
've fallen into? '
't want them to.'
's ended. Our part will end later - or sooner.'
"'
't make fun. I was serious. '
" '
's false.'
's anything, it will be some little private trick of his own-that he thinks is quite secret.'
's the one idea in all his little schemes, if he has any. But how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.'
's just biding his time and waiting on chance.'
'Yes, even here I could sleep.'
's brown hands, and the other lay softly upon his master'
`pawing at master,'
's how it is. Sorry. But where have you been to? '
's dark still! '
's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.'
'Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? '
's unwise whether they are true or false.'
't be.'
're free: free to go back to food and rest, wherever you wish to go, except to servants of the Enemy. And one day I may reward you, I or those that remember me.'
's the only way, we must take it.'
'It all comes from here, the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! '
'Sméagol! '
'Right or wrong, we must take the other.'
`Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light when all other lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.'
`But I still feel that they are looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.'
`Come! Let us see what Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where it was forged. But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the star-glass. Do not be afraid. Hold it up and watch!'
`On! On! '
's name. He was too late. So far Gollum'
's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the mist before his eyes he was aware dimly of Frodo'
's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of life could he find, nor feel the faintest flutter of the heart. Often he chafed his master'
't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo! O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!'
'Not asleep, dead! '
've got to do? And leave him?'
've got to go on.'
's hand and could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his master'
't choose themselves.'
't be their Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.'
