'Well?'
'Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!'
's second postscript. '
'How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf speaks about?'
'Did the verses apply to you then?'
'The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,'
'I should say,'
'I was too careless on the hill-top,'
'I think now,'
'Well!'
'You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,'
'I was delayed,'
'You will soon hear all you wish to know,'
`You don'
'Only a Ranger!'
'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,'
'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,'
'Elrond commanded it,'
'Hush!'
'You may have a chance later,'
'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!'
`Yes, it made quite a long tale,'
`From the first my heart misgave me, against all reason that I knew,'
` "
`He would not have come,'
`No, I should not put it so,'
`No,'
`Not safe for ever,'
`Nor I,'
'Despair, or folly?'
'Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!'
'I am afraid it will,'
'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,'
'Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,'
'To the end of the journey - in the end,'
"Then we must be more careful,'
`And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,'
`Well, you can go on looking forward,'
`Did you see anything pass over?'
'Who knows indeed!'
'We must decide before we go further,'
`From signs that we have seen lately,'
'Very well,'
'His arm has grown long,'
`Either stop where we are, or go back,'
'What do you say to fire?'
`If Elves could fly over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to save us,'
'That cannot be helped now,'
'We still have our journey and our errand before us,'
`You are right, Frodo,'
`There is a way that we may attempt,'
'The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,'
`Of course not! '
`I do not wish to go,'
'Need we wait until morning then? '
`There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some fifteen miles as the crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,'
'Listen, Hound of Sauron! '
`Fling fuel on the fire!'
`It is as I feared,'
`I do not know which to hope,'
`There are the Walls of Moria,'
`But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,'
'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,'
`And the Star of the House of Fëanor,'
'Yes,'
`Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,'
'I do not know,'
'I will,'
'I cannot say,'
' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo'
'I have no memory of this place at all! '
`It looks like a tomb,'
`Trapped! '
`No! '
`Wait a moment! Do not close it yet! '
`Now is the time! '
'Now! '
'Not yet! '
`Do as I say! '
'I do not know,'
'You take after Bilbo,'
`Ghâsh!'
'If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we should have been trapped here,'
`Now for the last race! '
`Look ahead! '
'A Balrog,'
'Over the bridge!'
`And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in vain,'
'I wouldn'
'It'
`I would ask one thing before we go,'
'Well, Frodo,'
`We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret. or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it. Which way would any of us choose in Frodo'
't be undone. '
'm in a hurry, said he, and I'
's. Inside, written in the wizard'
'It would have saved time.'
's letter, if you have never seen it?'
'Do you know where he is, or what he is doing?'
'the Ring draws them.'
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land of---'
`Sam was here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.'
'The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you, my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.'
" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you - and of the others. It is no small feat to have come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.'
`and that nearly proved our ruin. And yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.'
'We shall have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I will only say that I was held captive.'
'He is wise enough on his own ground. He thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall in time (as they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middle-earth like Aragorn son of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.'
`My dear Frodo, that is just what the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people, the Men of the West. They have helped me before; and I shall need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is not yet at rest.'
`How do the side and shoulder feel now?'
`It is mending fast. You will soon be sound again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were brought in.'
`It is gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the Big People who would quickly have been overcome by that splinter, which you bore for seventeen days.'
`not to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while you wore the Ring, for then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have seized you. You could see them, and they could see you.'
`He is not half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass filled with a clear light for eyes to see that can.'
'Yes, you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will all be there in places of honour.'
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.'
`Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out over the world! We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.'
`Here you will hear many songs and tales-if you can keep awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people come here who wish for peace, and thought. There is always a fire here, all the year round, but there is little other light.'
`But we cannot make any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.'
`The time has come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.'
`but not without profit. For one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo has now told openly for the first time; but that mattered little, since I had already guessed it. But I learned then first that Gollum'
`Pray do not interrupt, my good Glóin. That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought up here, we may as well abandon this Council.'
"I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region with the uncouth name of Shire."
"I said we, for we it may be, if you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in Elves or dying Númenor. This then is one choice before you. before us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward for those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends will also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide our time, we can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends. There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs, only in our means."
"Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could command that, then the Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought you here. For I have many eyes in my service, and I believe that you know where this precious thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what is your business there? "
`but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.'
'as you will see. I was in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom been in such need, and do not bear such misfortune well. Gandalf the Grey caught like a fly in a spider'
' he said. `
`Say rather that the Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is withdrawn into a little land, within bounds that he has set, though none can see them, waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not step beyond them.'
`not willingly. He might do so, if all the free folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need. And if he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely throw it away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be a most unsafe guardian; and that alone is answer enough.'
`There are many things in the deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part here to take thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or for a passing age of the world. We should seek a final end of this menace, even if we do not hope to make one.'
`It is not despair, for despair is only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other courses have been weighed, though as folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.'
'You were inattentive. I had already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only one that was not surprised.'
't start until we have found out about the Riders.'
`The power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a while less dangerous; but we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.'
'I only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, I want to see Elrond. I must be off.'
`We have reached the borders of the country that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked. The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.'
'But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the Great River, and then -'
'We cannot look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the first stage is safely over. I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.'
`Is there more in it than surprise at seeing four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen or heard?'
'If you bring a Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.'
`and how we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you are right.'
`There may be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.'
`And perils known and unknown will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?'
`But there is another way, and not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.'
'I fear that the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.'
`But we must not use the wood - not unless it is a choice between fire and death.'
'It is no good going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones - or anything else.'
`It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must do something to save ourselves.'
`Just a mouthful each - for all of us. It is very precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. Pass it round!'
'If there are any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, fire or no.'
`I go to find the Sun!'
`Whether they are good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!'
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.'
's hand again.'
`I thought from the beginning, when first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had at least been tried.'
'I will go and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there-if you can find the doors that are shut.'
's head will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the first time that I have been to Moria. I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after he was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive! '
'Who would? But the question is: who will follow me, if I lead you there? '
`It is as I said. The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? '
`Draw your blades, and stand back to back!'
`These were no ordinary wolves hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!'
`This is where the stream ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy. Come! We must hurry on. We are late.'
`But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I remember right, there was a flight of steps cut in the rock at their side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon flowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! '
`The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.'
`Poor Bill has been a useful companion and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.'
'Here the Elven-way from Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was made chiefly for their use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.'
'and I will not give judgement now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends, and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find them the better. Night is at hand! '
`You are a wise beast, and have learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in time to Elrond'
`Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.'
`They are wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply before I could recall them to my mind.'
'But they do not say anything of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written: I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.'
'these doors are probably governed by words. Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? '
`The passage is blocked behind us now and there is only one way out--on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.'
'but the arms were all guided by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than Orcs in the deep places of the world.'
'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff! '
'It depends on many chances. But going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West-door to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.'
`Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there are tales of Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have seen. He will not go astray-if there is any path to find. He has led us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is surer of finding the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Berúthiel.'
`And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier. We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and the middle-night has passed.'
`I do not like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.'
`At last we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.'
'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet, and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.'
`No. The Orcs have often plundered Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they are drowned in water--or in a shadow of fear.'
`The wealth of Moria was not in gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could obtain in traffic. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver, or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground, and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep, and disturbed that from which they fled, Durin'
`I never told him, but its worth was greater than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.'
`For morning it is again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side of Moria. Before today is over we ought to find the Great Gates and see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.'
`I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.'
`But I do not know yet exactly where we are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If we could find a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes only down deep shafts.'
's Axe and something helm. Then Balin is now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the word wellforged and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last two lines Óin to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.'
`but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered five, the fifth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish script.'
'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if, and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept the title that he took for less than five years. I wonder what happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few pages. Here is the last page of all.'
'but there were not many left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back to Dáin, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.'
'But our visit to this room has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! '
`Why did I delay? Here we are, caught, just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----'
'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.'
`Let us go, before the troll returns!'
'Now is the last chance. Run for it! '
'But there is time for wonder. Off you go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose paths leading right and downwards.'
`Swords are no more use here. Go!'
`I wonder if that is what they meant: that the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.'
`Let us hope that the fire now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.'
'If the sun is shining outside we may still escape. After me! '
`The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and narrow.'
`What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.'
' Aragorn and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others halted just within the doorway at the hall'
'Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you? '
's fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.'
'm thinking.'
's view. Doubt came into Frodo'
"Very pretty!"
"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!"
"Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came undone till ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected luck of widows'
"I am so sorry to keep you waiting!"
"So you have got here at last!"
"Now we are all here!"
"Put on a few eggs, there'
"Hush!"
"Excitable little fellow,"
's gentler descendant was reviving in the drawing-room. After a while and a drink he crept nervously to the door of the parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin speaking: "
"Of course there is a mark,"
"In lots of ways,"
"Also,"
"A long time before that, if I know anything about the loads East,"
"All the same, I should like it all plain and clear,"
"I have often wondered about my father'
"Great Elephants!"
"That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run,"
't know what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of the last few days, that came down from the hills and mountains in front of them. Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a waning moon appeared above the hills between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and Thorin muttered something about supper, "
"And that'
"Where did you go to, if I may ask?"
"Thank you!"
"Hush, hush! Good People! and good night!"
"That remains to be seen,"
"Well, if you know of anywhere better, take us there!"
"Good heavens!"
"I will give them all a surprise,"
"I must see if I can'
"Can'
"Well! that has got us on a bit,"
"A bit further,"
"Go away! little boys!"
"Very well,"
"May the wind under your wings bear you where the sun sails and the moon walks,"
"Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!"
"We are getting near,"
"They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers,"
"Who are you and what do you want?"
"They are on their way to visit the land of their fathers, away east beyond Mirkwood,"
"As soon as we were asleep,"
"Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now - Fili and Kili, I believe,"
"Well,"
"Well, here is Mirkwood!"
"Good-bye!"
"Good-bye then, and really good-bye!"
"O! why did we not remember Beorn'
"All in good time!"
"Stay! Your wish is granted!"
"You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain,"
's feet black with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur'
"It is well that I have found you!"
"Where are the Eagles?"
"Farewell! O Elvenking!"
"Ere long now,"
"There is a long road yet,"
"There and Back Again, a Hobbit'
"Of course!"
's very difficult to find anyone."
't be good till I move off."
"Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures. Anything from climbing trees to visiting Elves - or sailing in ships, sailing to other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite inter - I mean, you used to upset things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no idea you were still in business."
"And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles!"
't trouble! I can manage."
's smoke-ring would go green and come back to hover over the wizard'
"Let Thorin speak!"
"Gets funny queer fits, but he is one of the best, one of the best-as fierce as a dragon in a pinch."
"I put it there myself. For very good reasons. You asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins. Just let any one say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have all the bad luck you like, or go back to digging coal."
"Quite right,"
"Keep it safe!"
"What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?"
't be absurd! He is an enemy quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if they could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing your father wished was for his son to read the map and use the key. The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for you!"
"you are not at all yourself this morning-you have never dusted the mantel- piece!"
're lucky, and find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond'
"We need food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable safety-also it is very necessary to tackle the Misty Mountains by the proper path, or else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and start at the beginning again (if you ever get back at all)."
"Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!"
"Is there any more writing?"
"Draw your sword, Thorin!"
't bring things that are of no use. Either you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of the mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank me before all is over. Whatever did you want to go and drop him for, Dori?"
"Mr. Baggins has more about him than you guess."
"or soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all."
"unless you like to go back and ask the goblins nicely to let you have your pony back and your luggage."
"and even goblins tracking us will have a job to come down here quietly."
't bird-nesting time. Also naughty little boys that play with fire get punished."
"Take us where and as far as you will! We are already deeply obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger."
't be a fool Mr. Baggins if you can help it; and in the name of all wonder don'
"We are on the edge of his bee-pastures."
"and it is entirely an accident that we are in your lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the road that lies to the south of your country, when we were attacked by the evil goblins­-as I was about to tell you."
"a crack at the back of the cave opened; goblins came out and grabbed the hobbit and the dwarves and our troop of ponies-"
" Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but really he had begun to get very interested. You see, in the old days he had known the very part of the mountains that Gandalf was describing. He nodded and he growled, when he heard of the hobbit'
"I did the best I could. There we were with the wolves going mad underneath us and the forest beginning to blaze in places, when the goblins came down from the hills and discovered us. They yelled with delight and sang songs making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees…"
"-but bless me! this is a splendid place for smoke rings!"
"That is all the advice I can give you. Beyond the edge of the forest I cannot help you much; you must depend on your luck and your courage and the food I send with you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. But I wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this way again."
"The greatest of the forests of the Northern world. I hope you like the look of it. Now you must send back these excellent ponies you have borrowed."
't suppose I, or any one else, will ever see you again."
'T LEAVE THE PATH!"
"Things are drawing towards the end now, unless I am mistaken. There is an unpleasant time just in front of you; but keep your heart up! You may come through all right. There is news brewing that even the ravens have not heard. Good night!"
't damage him. Put him down, and listen first to what he has to say!"
"But things may change yet."
"Dread has come upon you all! Alas! it has come more swiftly than I guessed. The Goblins are upon you! Bolg* of the North is coming. O Dain! whose father you slew in Moria. Behold! the bats are above his army like a sea of locusts. They ride upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!"
"There is yet time for council. Let Dain son of Nain come swiftly to us!"
"Merry be the greenwood, while the world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!"
"May you ever appear where you are most needed and least expected! The oftener you appear in my halls the better shall I be pleased!"
"The Forest will grow somewhat more wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. Yet I wish he were banished from the world!"
't really suppose, do you, that all your adventures and escapes were managed by mere luck, just for your sole benefit? You are a very fine person, Mr. Baggins, and I am very fond of you; but you are only quite a little fellow in a wide world after all!"
'A Halfling,'
'Peace!'
'Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,'
'It is upon you,'
'Maybe, maybe,'
'Yes,'
'He would have gone,'
'Take the hilt,'
'It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed,'
'How much older?'
'Folly?'
'It is passed,'
'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,'
'wary'
'But the night will be too short,'
'You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!'
'At dawn three days ago, lord,'
'Past the second hour,'
'Gandalf!'
'Comfort yourself!'
'What then is your wisdom?'
'You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,'
'Nonetheless I do not trust you,'
'But what?'
'Yes, he will come,'
'No,'
'We are likely to see other newcomers first,'
'Do not weep, lord,'
'You cannot enter here,'
'What are you doing here?'
'Burn him alive?'
'Maybe I can,'
'You will need every man and more,'
'Darkness is passing,'
'Work of the Enemy!'
'Stay! Stay!'
'He calls,'
'Come!'
'Such counsels will make the Enemy'
'What then would you have,'
'To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders his charge is diminished in love or in honour,'
'Come hither!'
'The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the Lord,'
'And if not,'
'Then in the name of the king, go and find some old man of less lore and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!'
'My friend,'
'As for Faramir,'
'He is not yet sure,'
'That is true,'
'No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting,'
'Where such laws hold,'
'Silence!'
'Name the terms,'
'The realm of Sauron is ended!'
'Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend,'
'A great Shadow has departed,'
'The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,'
'Tonight at least you should wear one,'
'As for Bilbo,'
'Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems barren and cold!'
'Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc!'
'To see how your work goes, my friend,'
'The New Age begins,'
'Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc?'
'l observe, my good Fangorn,'
'No, not dead, so far as I know,'
'You may be right,'
'Well Saruman!'
'You know the answers,'
'Then once more you are going the wrong way,'
'Then leave him!'
'Yes, I think you had better do that,'
'Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured,'
'And there you'
'That is just what we should like, too,'
'I will indeed,'
'He will,'
'Better times, for Bree at any rate,'
'Deep in, but not at the bottom,'
'I am with you at present,'
'As well as ever, you may be sure,'
'There weren'
'Quite capable,'
'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.'
'Yes,'
'On, Shadowfax! We must hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight, calling for aid. War is kindled. See, there is the fire on Amon Dîn, and flame on Eilenach; and there they go speeding west: Nardol, Erelas, Min-Rimmon, Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.'
'For you are not going like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will be as safe as you can be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or the Ring is taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.'
'And as for valour, that cannot be computed by stature. He has passed through more battles and perils than you have, Ingold, though you be twice his height; and he comes now from the storming of Isengard, of which we bear tidings, and great weariness is on him, or I would wake him. His name is Peregrin, a very valiant man.'
'Not he, yet one of his kindred.'
'The news of that grief should have been told first to the father.'
'And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late in repairing the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will now be your best defence against the storm that is at hand - that and such hope as I bring. For not all the tidings that I bring are evil. But leave your trowels and sharpen your swords!'
'I have ridden on its wings. Let me pass! I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship lasts. Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have known. Let me pass!'
'Though if he comes, it is likely to be in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At least he should come unheralded by us.'
'See, Master Pippin, there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor; though it might have been better, if you had learned something of it, when you were still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods of the Shire. Do as I bid! It is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the coming of one who will, if he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?'
'If you have walked all these days with closed ears and mind asleep, wake up now!'
'One of the twain. The other is with Théoden of Rohan and may come hereafter. Halflings they are, as you see, yet this is not he of whom the omens spoke.'
'Be not unjust in your grief! Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was a masterful man, and one to take what he desired. I journeyed far with him and learned much of his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news of that ere we came?'
'and speak after the Lord, if you are resolved on this.'
'Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me less pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.'
'For I have not ridden hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind, only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous. Is it naught to you that Théoden has fought a great battle and that Isengard is overthrown, and that I have broken the staff of Saruman?'
'Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you will die. You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that I do not understand your purpose in questioning for an hour one who knows the least, while I sit by?'
'Well, my lord Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event, which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all the aid that you are pleased to ask for. But I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small. But all worthy things that are in peril as the world now stands, those are my care. And for my part, I shall not wholly fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything passes through this night that can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower again in days to come. For I also am a steward. Did you not know?'
'I did the best I could.'
'When will Faramir return?'
'I have come back here, for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed while you still may. At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord Denethor again. No, when the summons comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. There will be no dawn.'
'Time to get up and make yourself presentable. You are summoned to the Lord of the City to learn your new duties.'
'To keep you out of mischief; and if you do not like being here, you can remember that you brought it on yourself.'
'Gandalf! He always turns up when things are darkest. Go on! Go on, White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!'
'He came with me. But let us not tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come with us. Indeed he must, for if he does not forget his new duties more easily than I do, he must attend on his lord again within this hour. Come, Pippin, follow us!'
'The morning of two days ago, nigh on three days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?'
'In no case would Boromir have brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you deceive yourself. He would have stretched out his hand to this thing, and taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it for his own, and when he returned you would not have known your son.'
'Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be. And for me, I pity even his slaves.'
'Had I done so, I could have sent this thing hither to your keeping and spared myself and others much anguish. And now hearing you speak I trust you less, no more than Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do not trust myself in this, and I refused this thing, even as a freely given gift. You are strong and can still in some matters govern yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing, it would have overthrown you. Were it buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin, still it would burn your mind away, as the darkness grows, and the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.'
'Maybe even your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he would discover that we had thrown down Saruman and had taken the Stone. Still what of that? We could not use it to much purpose, or without his knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time draws near. And he is strong and stern underneath, Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and dare great risks at need. That may be it. He may have used the Stone and shown himself to the Enemy, challenging him, for this very purpose. I wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if they do not come too late. There are evil days ahead. To sleep while we may!'
'Only one but will I allow tonight.'
'Yet my heart guessed that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for evil. But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight. Treachery, treachery I fear; treachery of that miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us remember that a traitor may betray himself and do good that he does not intend. It can be so, sometimes. Good night! '
'even if he comes too late. But think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days ago, and the miles are long from Edoras.'
'But he still lived when I left him. Yet he is resolved to stay with the rearguard, lest the retreat over the Pelennor become a rout. He may, perhaps, hold his men together long enough, but I doubt it. He is pitted against a foe too great. For one has come that I feared.'
'King of Angmar long ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgûl, a spear of terror in the hand of Sauron, shadow of despair.'
'Fugitives from Cair Andros have already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.'
'Go back to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that awaits you and your Master. Go!'
'Is it not a law in the City that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel, unless their lord gives them leave?'
'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet bring ruin on us. I have no time.'
'What is this tale? Be quick!'
'but if I do, then others will die, I fear. Well, I must come, since no other help can reach him. But evil and sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy has power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.'
's absence!'
'but it still lies heavy on this City.'
'you and I should have ridden to the fields long ago, but other matters delay me. Yet come swiftly if I call!'
'Stay this madness!'
'But others may contest your will, when it is turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?'
'but you cannot come to him yet. For he must seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it not. Whereas your part is to go out to the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you. This you know in your heart.'
'We are needed. There is much that you can yet do.'
'if your will could have its way?'
's servants that stood there aghast. '
'Men may long remember your words, Ioreth! For there is hope in them. Maybe a king has indeed returned to Gondor; or have you not heard the strange tidings that have come to the City?'
'She lies within and is not dead, but is near death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart, as you have heard, and he is now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is in ashes.'
'But for the present I am but the Captain of the Dúnedain of Arnor; and the Lord of Dol Amroth shall rule the City until Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us all in the days that follow and in our dealings with the Enemy.'
'Let us not stay at the door, for the time is urgent. Let us enter! For it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of Gondor: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and so shall the rightful king be known.'
'I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth behind me, and she shall take me to the woods, but not to her sisters. And Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.'
'But this comes not from the wound. See! that is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart of the Nazgûl, as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was given by some Southron arrow, I would guess. Who drew it forth? Was it kept?'
'Éomer shall stay here for a while. But do not speak yet of war or woe, until you are made whole again. Great gladness it is to see you wake again to health and hope, so valiant a lady!'
'And anything else that this Rider of Rohan may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where his name is in honour.'
' time at the latest? And they must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.'
'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand mail-clad knights apiece. No, he will not smile.'
'it is also the custom for ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you. You have naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But unless your master has come to new wisdom, then with all his servants you will be in great peril.'
'Indeed, I know them all and all their history, and despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron, you cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?'
'This is much to demand for the delivery of one servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so that he falls to haggling? And if indeed we rated this prisoner so high, what surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his part? Where is this prisoner? Let him be brought forth and yielded to us, and then we will consider these demands.'
'But as for your terms, we reject them utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We did not come here to waste words in treating with Sauron, faithless and accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!'
'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?'
's happened to the world?'
'or if you like, the eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.« But in Gondor the New Year will always now begin upon the twenty-fifth of March when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has tended you, and now he awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead you to him.'
'and he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon to his crowning, but he waits for you.'
'Even the orc-rags that you bore in the black land; Frodo, shall be preserved. No silks and linens, nor any armour or heraldry could be more honourable. But later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.'
'But you went to the very brink of death ere he recalled you, putting forth all his power, and sent you into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, still it is now time to sleep again.'
'Many folk like to know beforehand what is to be set on the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast like to keep their secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder. And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.'
'This is your realm, and the heart of the greater realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is begun; and it is your task to order its beginning and to preserve what may be preserved. For though much has been saved, much must now pass away; and the power of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.'
'The Third Age was my age. I was the Enemy of Sauron; and my work is finished. I shall go soon. The burden must lie now upon you and your kindred.'
'Verily this is a sapling of the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling of Galathilion, and that a fruit of Telperion of many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how it comes here in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere the kings failed or the Tree withered in the court, a fruit must have been set here. For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years, and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if ever a fruit ripens, it should be planted, lest the line die out of the world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older far than your line, King Elessar.'
'and to thank you for your aid in all that has been achieved.'
'and in this age it may well prove that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend. But now come tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of Orthanc yet? For I do not suppose that he will think you have improved the view from his windows.'
'that with great care you say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?'
'but this snake had still one tooth left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded you, even you Treebeard, knowing the soft spot in your heart. Well, he is gone, and there is no more to be said. But the Tower of Orthanc now goes back to the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.'
'Where are you going?'
'no and no. But in any case the time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen him, and he would have shown you wisdom and mercy.'
'and I see no hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For we offer it to you.'
'But alas for Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether. All the same, I am not sure that Treebeard is right: I fancy he could do some mischief still in a small mean way.'
's very cosy here, and the food'
'How is Harry?'
'll bless you.'
'How many?'
'if they are afraid of just five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at any rate they will give you peace at night while we stay.'
'He knows it and loves it.'
'You have forgotten Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.'
'Quite untroubled and I should guess, not much interested in anything that we have done or seen, unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time later for you to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.'
'll! manage all right. Good-bye dear friends! Not for the last time, not yet. Good-bye!'
'than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth. Go in peace! I will not say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.'
'Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,'
'Then I can answer your other questions,'
'Gandalf!'
'Gandalf,'
's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed suddenly. '
'Yes, I am white now,'
'No, I did not find them,'
'Yes,'
'Did he!'
'What? In riddles?'
'What then shall I say?'
'Wait a minute!'
'You certainly did not see me,'
'With Treebeard and the Ents,'
'I do not know,'
'I did not say so,'
'We shall see, we shall see,'
'Yes, together we will follow you,'
'I have stayed already too long,'
'Then tell us what you will, and time allows!'
'Name him not!'
'Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,'
'It was made, and it had not been destroyed,'
'What is that?'
'In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,'
'That will not be far to seek,'
'I shall not walk. Time presses,'
'Certainly,'
'Battle and war!'
'Look!'
'Stay, strangers here unknown!'
'Your staff,'
'You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a great support to your master,'
'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.'
'Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?'
'Send your guards down to the stairs foot,'
'Now, lord,'
'No,'
'Dark have been my dreams of late,'
'A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels'
'Verily,'
'Your fingers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped a sword-hilt,'
'Will you not take the sword?'
'But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless'
'Nay, Éomer, you do not fully understand the mind of Master Wormtongue,'
'That I knew already,'
'Well, at last we set off!'
'Where is Shadowfax?'
'I thank you, Théoden King,'
'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,'
'Behold the White Rider!'
'Unlooked-for?'
'It is not wizardry, but a power far older,'
'If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard '
'Nevertheless to Isengard I go,'
'I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,'
'Let the Orcs lie,'
'It is hot in here,'
'Yes,'
'That, I think, no one will ever know,'
'You need no weapons,'
'You should be glad, Théoden King,'
'This is our way,'
'Look!'
'Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,'
'Stay where you are!'
'Doubtless he would!'
'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?'
'It is past noon,'
'Now let us take our ease here for a little!'
'Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once; and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to find Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. "
'"
'"
'"
'Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower. There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but where they have all gone to now, I don'
'"
'Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is beyond our reach at present,'
'Do you indeed?'
'And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf?'
'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,'
'I will go up,'
'As you will,'
'Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman, Gríma Wormtongue!'
'Will I come down?'
'The treacherous are ever distrustful,'
'Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows.'
'Come back, Saruman!'
'It is the end,'
'Well, that is done,'
'It seems that Saruman thinks so too,'
'Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,'
'Hoo! Come now!'
'Yes, we must go, and go now,'
'No,'
'The Ents pay attention to every detail!'
'All right! What'
'It is not for you, Saruman!'
's hand. '
'That won'
'Look at me!'
'I think all will be well now,'
'As you will,'
'He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,'
'About the palantíri of the Kings of Old,'
'Oh yes, you had,'
'Good!'
'Mercy!'
'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgûl,'
'See now!'
`Ah well, sir,'
`I wish I wasn'
'His foresight failed him.'
'There are some things that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must here await the morning-light.'
'these Orcs, and young Saruman down at Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.'
'Beyond all hope you return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!'
'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.'
'Get up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me. Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.'
'But you are all in white!'
'Indeed I am Saruman, one might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now, tell me of yourselves! I have passed through fire and deep water, since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!'
'There was a darkness over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their captivity, until the eagle told me.'
'that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself. The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed. Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.'
'Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.'
'No! For I was talking aloud to myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.'
'But Isengard cannot fight Mordor, unless Saruman first obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the field of battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged Messenger.'
'You only slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is the danger that he sees, and he has fled back to Isengard to double and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his fiery thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.'
'therefore I must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.'
'it is a comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me. How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one day and judge between us!'
'The little that I know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.'
'And so am I, very dangerous: more dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is perilous-not least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled with it. The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they are strong.'
'I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.'
'That is not the road that you must take. I have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of the Ring could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.'
'Who knows? Have patience. Go where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.'
'Will you come now with me?'
'that you could go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed through the fire and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.'
'Time is short. But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.'
'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.'
'From the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in Durin'
's head is now sacred, let us find one that it is right to cleave!'
'Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of parted friends. Now there is need of haste.'
'We are too great a burden for one.'
'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.'
'but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride now together, and part not in this world again!'
'Ride on!'
'Tell us what you see there before us!'
'We are all friends here. Or should be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma. Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago. Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!'
'Forgive me, but that too must be left at the doors.'
'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.'
'Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.'
'The wise speak only of what they know, Gríma son of Gálmód. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through fire and death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning falls.'
'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.'
'look out upon your land! Breathe the free air again!'
'Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!'
'But first send for Éomer. Do I not guess rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Gríma, of him that all save you name the Wormtongue?'
'Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.'
'that way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for a little while.'
'To put your trust in Éomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can ride should be sent west at once, as Éomer counselled you: we must first destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we fall. If we succeed - then we will face the next task. Meanwhile your people that are left, the women and the children and the old, should stay to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.'
'But Isengard is strong. And other perils draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!'
'You do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.'
'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?'
'I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.'
'But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will fit my need: swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan we may call it. But now shall ride him into great hazard, setting silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own. And already there is a bond of love between us.'
's saddlebow.'
'It will be a black night.'
'I said that I would return and meet you here.'
'Nay, I see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope the event has proved.'
'I shall return to Isengard, and those who will may come with me. There we may see strange things.'
'and since he has done you great injury, it would be fitting if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?'
'We will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you, Théoden. We go to a parley not to a fight.'
'The morning may bring new counsel.'
'I feel a great wrath about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?'
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords: and ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.'
'These are but herdsmen. They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.'
'Is it so long since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden, it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.'
'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!'
'Grievous is the fall of your men; but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!'
'Friends have laboured here.'
's Vale was burning.'
'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.'
'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will pass you by!'
'And was it Saruman that ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?'
'and we at any rate have not eaten since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?'
'Well, Théoden. will you ride with me to find Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.'
'On the edge of the Forest.'
" is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much about Gandalf'
"I need your help. You have done much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage."
"where have you been? And have you seen the others?"
"Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!"
"Hm, well, I find you are not such hasty folk as I thought. You said much less than you might, and not more than you should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again."
'Well, I do not. I have now a last task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous, and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish may come with me - but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.'
'Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits? Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.'
'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!'
'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.'
'Aragorn shall come with me. Let the others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if there is anything to hear or see.'
'Saruman come forth!'
'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?'
'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen, Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?'
'But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free - if you choose.'
': free from bond, of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire. But you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you merit them.'
'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast you from the order and from the Council.'
' said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf'
'Let us go.'
'Now I must find Treebeard and tell him how things have gone.'
'though they came to the balance of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning. He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool! He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron - who knows what he can do?'
'I will do nothing to him. I do not wish for mastery. What w ill become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred hurt itself! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.'
'Let us leave them!'
'I have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.'
'I fear that I must take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.'
'But you have not plotted to cover all the world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.'
'That is what I hoped. Now I can go and turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary. The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must stay upstairs and look out of the windows.'
't let it rankle! Be thankful no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished - it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel honoured by his concern.'
't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!'
'I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!'
'Gandalf! Forgive me!'
'What did you see, and what did you say?'
'We have had a narrow escape!'
'He was not held long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory, or the horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps. Will you, Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.'
'But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know where it is bestowed. The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he has handled it and looked in it, as should never have happened. He ought never to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should have been quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did not at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!'
'But at this time we have been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit from a grave blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not ready for such a trial, if indeed I shall ever be so: But even if I found the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet - until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.'
'There remains a short while of doubt which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone was in Orthanc - why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit was captive there, driven to look in the glass for his torment by Saruman. That dark mind will be filled now with the voice and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it may take some time before he learns his error. We must snatch that time. We have been too leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.'
's Deep!'
'Away, Shadowfax!'
't a saddle or a bridle!'
'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears. It will not be long before we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.'
'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring of Isengard. The chief and master of these was under the Dome of Stars at Osgiliath before its ruin. The three others were far away in the North. In the house of Elrond it is told that they were at Annúminas, and Amon Sûl, and Elendil'
'You knew you were behaving wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, though you did not listen. I did not tell you all this before, because it is only by musing on all that has happened that I have at last understood, even as we ride together. But if I had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier to resist. On the contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After that advice about fire goes to the heart.'
'That is what I hoped.'
'If the giving of information is to be the cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my days in answering you. What more do you want to know?'
'The Westfold dales are opening before us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow yonder is the mouth of the Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond and the Glittering Caves. Do not ask me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time you may get an answer longer than you wish. You will not see the caves yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.'
's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'
