`Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,'
'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,'
`Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram,'
'His arm has grown long indeed,'
`If any dawn can pierce these clouds,'
'I will tread the path with you, Gandalf! '
'I will,'
`We must find a way round the northern edge,'
'It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,'
'Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,'
`There are the emblems of Durin!'
'That is plain enough,'
'This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of the three passages,'
'That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,'
'The Chamber of Records,'
'That would be Ori'
`We cannot get out,'
'We cannot get out,'
`Well, well! That'
`Or Caradhras less cruel,'
`There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zâram! '
'That is Durin'
'O Kheled-zâram fair and wonderful! '
'Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises.'
'Good luck, Sam! '
`If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,'
`But the Dwarves did not make the evil,'
`I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do not lead us well,'
`Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest dreams l saw Durin'
'Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram, and cold are the springs of Kibil-nâla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.'
`I did not know that your plight was so evil,'
`And it seemed to me, too,'
`And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? '
`None, Lady,'
`There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,'
'It is said that the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues '
`Maybe,'
'That'
`Orcs! '
'Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas! '
`and cold are the springs of Kibil-nâla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may see them soon.'
`if he can draw snow down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.'
'It was no ordinary storm. It is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and that drift was laid to cut off our escape.'
'We are departing as quickly as we may!'
`The first thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could not get our baggage-pony up this stair.'
`They are invisible, and their own masters cannot find them or open them, if their secret is forgotten.'
`If you are a friend, speak the password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.'
' use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we must all take care in the dark.'
`This is the great realm and city of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.'
`A corslet of Moria-silver? That was a kingly gift! '
`I have looked on Moria, and it is very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.'
`I guess that is where we now stand.'
'It was well for us that the pool had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.'
`Did you meet the beater of the drums? '
`that there is a light ahead. But it is not daylight. It is red. What can it be? '
'Pippin and Merry next. Straight on and up the stair beyond the door! '
's Bane! '
" Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again. It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.'
`I cannot pass without turning aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! '
'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!'
`There lies the Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell! '
`It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! '
'Come! Let us hurry! The others are out of sight.'
`We cannot build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road already longer than was wise.'
`I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither have we done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.'
'or I will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.'
`A merry troop of fools we shall look! Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.'
`that my choice would remain secret and known only to myself.'
'Why it is better than the honey-cakes of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! '
`It is enough for me to have seen the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.'
' she said. `
't there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse with the tail of-my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn'
`But I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria - the shadow of the Balrog,'
`The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! '
'We, of course, were only sent to help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom. Hard was my parting from Lothlórien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.'
'But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,'
'Then lost it must be,'
'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end they may lead,'
'I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to fight,'
'My blood runs chill,'
'Here is a thing unheard of!'
'Does he feel no fear?'
'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building,'
'Say not so!'
'The Sun may shine here,'
'Not willingly,'
'Alas! I had heart only for myself,'
'Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings,'
'In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill,'
'That you certainly are not,'
'Nay, lord,'
'Well, lord,'
'Then I must go for my axe,'
'We will come, if our own lords allow it,'
'and here Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single orc. Come and see how it was! And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder! Shall we visit them, Legolas, do you think?'
'Stout men and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as boys beside them; for they are grim men of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.'
'Word came to Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the Dúnedain ride to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. Gandalf sent it, I would guess.'
'The Lady of the Wood! She read many hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our own kinsfolk, Legolas?'
'Did you say aught to - him? Even Gandalf feared that encounter.'
'Nay, my friends, I and the lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted. The strength was enough - barely.'
'and now he will strike more swiftly.'
'For what help is there to send thither, and how could it come there in time?'
'It is a fell name; and little to the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter the strokes of Mordor?'
'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.'
's son would have been the first to run to the gleam of gold. But not here! Let it lie!'
'for they cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains all wasted.'
'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise.'
'There are countless things still to see in Middle-earth, and great works to do. But if all the fair folk take to the Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.'
's son, who had deemed himself more tough than Men, and hardier under earth than any Elf. But neither did I prove; and I was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn.'
'Nay! I will not speak of that journey.'
'For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory the war was now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
's son to ask for wrights of the Mountain. But men are better than gates, and no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'
'But what did I say? Mortals cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a pot of beer.'
'but I can speedily fetch it, if there be need.'
'and what say you now?'
'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And my heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.'
'Well, farewell. my hobbits! You should come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be kept awake for fear of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some of us may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all be gathered together ever again.'
'But we must be swift,'
'The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we could use nearer than the water-side,'
'S is for Sauron,'
'Maybe there is no right choice,'
'We saw no signs of them,'
'You left the East Wind to me,'
'How then do you read this riddle?'
'But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?'
'Well, after them!'
'Here is another riddle!'
'What do you think?'
'Or about the captives,'
'I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us which way to go,'
'Then he at least was alive,'
'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,'
'And there is this also,'
'Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,'
'And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause '
'You are our guide,'
'I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into mist,'
'Well, let us go on,'
'Nothing can we see to guide us here,'
'Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no counsel '
'Five leagues or one,'
'Or spears,'
'But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '
'We do not speak of dwarves or children,'
'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?'
'No one,'
'But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the first to be lost '
'But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,'
'Feet!'
'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,'
'I mark them,'
'My very bones are chilled,'
'And do not forget that old man!'
'And here is the knife that cut them!'
'And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have a hand free?'
'I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the long road through Rohan on foot,'
'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'
'I dare say you could,'
'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,'
'Look at what?'
'I see, I see now!'
'Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?'
'Saruman!'
'Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,'
'Then you know about Frodo!'
'Then is not Saruman a traitor?'
'Good, good!'
'Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin'
'Long has that been lost,'
'Then she sent me no message?'
'That is no comfort,'
'Not alone!'
'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the scalps of Men,'
'It is dark for archery,'
'I followed you to shake off sleep,'
'Two!'
'We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our finger-nails,'
'Twenty-one!'
'No, no!'
'And when we come there, what shall we see?'
'And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?'
'Well-earned?'
'Or second,'
'Less than an eye!'
'And pipe-weed?'
'Indeed yes,'
'Aye, you do indeed,'
'Now, now!'
'It would,'
'The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!'
'We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,'
'We understand it all perfectly now,'
'I will come,'
'Like, and yet unlike,'
'But he may have other things to cast,'
'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?'
'He would not wish us to linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our Company are living prisoners.'
'Let us bear Boromir away!'
'And Orcs would have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.'
'but I will say naught of it.'
'That was a strange deed!'
'is either to take the remaining boat and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.'
'Dwarves too can go swiftly, and they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long start.'
'But it needs the light of day and for that we cannot wait.'
'Let us hope that they, too, did not meet their end here.'
'Let us find a path down to the fields as quick as may be.'
'And he had the use of his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.'
'only by day can we see if any tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be carried off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we might pass the signs and never know it.'
'And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs that led you to the brooch.'
'and you are skilled in the chase. You shall choose.'
'Would that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!'
'Even Legolas on a hill-top could not see them till the Sun is up.'
'This is a bitter end to our hope and to all our toil!'
'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?'
'My legs must forget the miles. They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.'
'Well, now we must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!'
'we cannot escape them in this bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?'
'Give me your name, horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,'
'Our friends were hobbits.'
'But these were very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.'
's axe and the bow of Legolas, if they will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.'
'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great, free or begrudged.'
'The matter of the Lady Galadriel lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. '
'I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!'
'The Riders have left chip and bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.'
'Let nothing that dwells in Fangorn be troubled on my account!'
'Remember, it is perilous to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!'
'But we cannot eat them as well as walk on them '
'I should be happier if I could see the print of a boot.'
'A bent blade is enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to find any traces. It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I am sure of it, even under the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even now, maybe.'
'It was an orc-weapon,'
'What was that old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you better it?'
'But I do not like the look of this Fangorn: and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had led anywhere else!'
'I have done it no harm. '
'I do not wish to meet that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!'
'We cannot pursue them through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do not find them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.'
'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could not see him at first.'
'Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot first!'
'Stop him, Legolas!'
'If no land divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could fight while we watched and waited.'
'There is another thing that I should like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?'
'I am glad that it was not you.'
'Come, Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!'
'Many have said that it was never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.'
'Not alone!'
'I will gladly go with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.'
'Indeed it is time for sleep. Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!'
'but I looked on the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone to see your sword-play.'
'Khazâd! Khazâd!'
'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.'
'But I will help as I may.'
'Come, Gamling, let us see how things go on the wall!'
'Let us leave them! I guess their thought already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of crushing and strangling.'
'that you may come safe from war and return to see them again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.'
'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves and share their wonder with me.'
'You may know, but I cannot guess.'
'I cannot believe that!'
'It would go better after a meal. t have a sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends by finding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink would pay off some of my score against you.'
' meat or anything that they have mauled.'
'The score is much reduced.'
'Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.'
'We are beginning the story in the middle. I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day when our fellowship was broken.'
'It feels good, and it smells good,'
'if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?'
'Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with both hands, one might say.'
'Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?'
'I wish to see him and learn if he really looks like you.'
'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here represent our kindred. We also will come behind.'
'In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.'
's throw, at least!'
