'You shall ride my horse,'
'Drink this!'
'Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,'
'Ride forward! Ride!'
'Ride on! Ride on!'
'Yes,'
`Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength'
'I will shorten the stirrups up to the saddle-skins, and you must sit as tight as you can. But you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I command him to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger presses too near, he will bear you away with a speed that even the black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.'
'if your friends would be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that brings us all in peril.'
's white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us, and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.'
`to send the Ring to him would only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we could, soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding place and would bend all his power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then Night will come.'
`two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it over the Sea, or to destroy it.'
'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the Council his feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring was not lost for ever, but wished us to think so; for he began to lust for it for himself. Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.'
'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be taken away for ever.'
'Eagles'
's ears. Then Thorondor bore up Glorfindel'
's also. Therefore Idril and Tuor departed from Nan-tathren, and went southwards down the river to the sea; and they dwelt there by the mouths of Sirion, and joined their people to the company of Elwing Dior'
