'Long yet will that march be delayed,'
`So be it,'
'Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,'
`The day has come at last,'
'If you understand it, then be content,'
'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is clean of the servants of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur'
'A man is here, lord,'
' But Imrahil said: '
'Come forth!'
'But I shall die,'
'No niggard are you, Éomer,'
'little cock-a-whoop'
'The land of Anórien is still passing by.'
's, unless the king should come again.'
'If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel, we should not then shake with dread under this gloom, fearing the worst, and our counsels would be undisturbed. If you do not trust me to endure the test, you do not know me yet.'
'Amroth to Faramir!'
'Or may I not command my own servants?'
' The hideous orc-head that was set upon the carven figure was cast down and broken in pieces, and the old king'
'And would you have your proud folk say of you: “There goes a lord who tamed a wild shieldmaiden of the North! Was there no woman of the race of Númenor to choose?”'
'The Green Province'
'Fence of Shadow'
'Fortress of the Stars'
'shore, line of surf'
'cold, chill'
'oppression'
'Land of Stone'
'(crested) wave'
'Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?'
'It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil'
'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him that his father was not king. "
'Alas for Boromir! It was too sore a trial! '
' cried Aragorn. '
'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a Dwarf?'
'but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter. And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall a Man answer?'
" Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him? '
