'Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,'
'I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,'
'And earlier, it is to be hoped,'
'And yet'
'Well,'
'These are the terms,'
'You can have what I have got left,'
'Yes, I see,'
's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more worthy of trust.'
's messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard.'
'Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or spoken,'
'Which way would they turn, do you think?'
'That is true,'
'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king'
'Maggots!'
'I find it quite easy to believe,'
'But now,'
'Who is Saruman?'
'Some time ago I began to wonder how Orcs dared to pass through my woods so freely,'
'I will stop it!'
'I don'
'So do I,'
'Hm, hoom, here I am again,'
'Hoom, hom! Here we come with a boom, here we come at last!'
'I do not know how it happened,'
'Indeed yes,'
'It is a pity that our friends lie in between,'
'The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from doubt,'
'One that you cannot slay with arrows,'
'Dangerous!'
'There lies the Gap of Rohan,'
'Hope, yes,'
'You have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,'
'Is Éomer here?'
'It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,'
'Forth Eorlingas!'
'Yes,'
'You have my promise,'
'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.'
's arm within the Wizard'
'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,'
'We wouldn'
'All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it, makes me uneasy,'
'Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the upper end of the Wizard'
'Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the sort. All Saruman'
'Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at the very least,'
'They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang, crash-crack, in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like rabbits in a sand-pit. I don'
'The Ents are safe,'
'Not he!'
'"
'I wonder what he is doing,'
'Saruman, Saruman!'
'Not likely,'
'Good!'
'Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,'
'Yes, there can be no doubt,'
'Not yet,'
'The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the Sundering Seas '
'Of course not,'
's fall. Pursuers from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you remember the birds?'
'My heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner but now I must rest a little to run the better. And if we rest, then the blind night is the time to do so.'
's anger is not less, for now the horse is wild and will let no man handle him.'
's house, you shall see for yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?'
's, the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor, and Grishnákh'
're coming!'
's the time to do a deal.'
's Orcs can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!'
't you think?'
'I wonder what Ents can do about it anyway.'
't think they are quite as safe and, well funny as they seem. They seem slow, queer, and patient, almost sad; and yet I believe they could be roused. If that happened, I would rather not be on the other side.'
'I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.'
'And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their voices?'
'I shall not stay there long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the moon!'
's model or a slave'
'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would be here to welcome such honourable guests.'
't know much about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches, and in the flare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evil-looking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know, they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree: only he was not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.'
's Deep, to warn them that the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can be avoided.'
's Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.'
'But it has long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.'
