`Alas! alas!'
`Not through lack of watchfulness,'
"Talking,'
`I need no map,'
'That is true,'
`If Gandalf would go before us with a bright flame, he might melt a path for you,'
`Well,'
`I will not go,'
'I do not wish to go to Moria,'
'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,'
'I have heard both,'
`And there is the Tree of the High Elves!'
`I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,'
`They are coming! '
'Ai! ai! '
`There lie the woods of Lothlórien! '
`Lothlórien! '
'It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land whence we wandered in ages long ago,'
`I will climb up,'
'Then dig a hole in the ground,'
`Daro!'
`Eight,'
`The eighth is a dwarf,'
'Very good,'
`Farewell, sweet Nimrodel! '
`I can walk this path,'
`The agreement was made without my consent,'
'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! '
'Come!'
`I am an Elf and a kinsman here,'
`Alas for the folly of these days! '
`I will go first,'
'We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,'
'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,'
`I see that you do not yet know what to do,'
`I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,'
`Nay! '
'Yes.'
`Yrch!'
`Elbereth Gilthoniel!'
'But who can say what it hit?'
'Grievous is our loss,'
`And I too will go with him,'
'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,'
`The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may seem to this company. Sméagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.'
's bidding, much though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black thoughts.'
'In the days of fair weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind; but we set a guard at the tree'
's bit of news about Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.'
`But the Elves of this land were of a race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not now remember them: Only I hear the stones lament them: deep they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.'
`The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.'
's toes.'
's voice surely should be heard? '
'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! '
`That is the fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! '
'Lothlórien! We have come to the eaves of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! '
'but we hear that Lórien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen, and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the northern border.'
'That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlórien, Lórien of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.'
`Then many of the Elves of Nimrodel'
`I am at home among trees, by root or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is their shape and way of growth.'
`if that is more after the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you wish to hide from Orcs.'
'But they say also that you need have no fear. They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice across the Nimrodel, and knew that I was one of their Northern kindred, and therefore they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo; for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep watch at the foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.'
's face, and Sam'
`Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.'
' said Haldir at last. `
`but the others have not this skill. Must they swim?'
'Here all are enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry in the woodland under leaves of gold! '
`At first we were weary and danger was too close behind and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien.'
`of all elf-banes the most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.'
`Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless it be her gift.'
`Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to find and lose, as it seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, Gimli son of Glóin: for your loss you suffer of your own free will, and you might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken your companions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the memory of Lothlórien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.'
's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn'
'Is it, as I think. an eagle? '
`It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.'
'That was a mighty shot in the dark, my friend!'
`but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else fleets by: it is a grief to them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. The passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in the long long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.'
'Yet we must needs make up our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.'
`It would be faithless now to say farewell.'
'And then whither?'
'I for one!'
'The Sun is high,'
'And now our fates are woven together,'
'Come!'
'And what may be the words of the seer?'
'I also will come,'
'The Dead are following,'
'That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,'
'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,'
'To that the Elves know not the answer,'
'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,'
'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,'
'Come, Gimli!'
'And Gimli with him!'
'He has neither rested nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him; but some dark doubt or care sits on him.'
'Did she not speak through Gandalf of the ride of the Grey Company from the North?'
'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their own lands.'
'Speak and be comforted, and shake off the shadow! What has happened since we came back to this grim place in the grey morning?'
'for I do not fear the Dead.'
'Aragorn, wilt thou go?'
'I see shapes of Men and of horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.'
'The houses are dead, and there is too little here that grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not die.'
'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter the City again at this time. Yet there is need for the captains to hold council at once, and he prays that you and Éomer of Rohan will come down to his tents, as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.'
'If Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have been its glory in the days of its rising.'
'And that will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.'
'For all those who come to know him come to love him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we left Dunharrow, and such a fear was on all the folk that none would look on our going, save the Lady Éowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'
'In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the strength of his will, had he taken the Ring to himself. Not for naught does Mordor fear him. But nobler is his spirit than the understanding of Sauron; for is he not of the children of Lúthien? Never shall that line fail, though the years may lengthen beyond count.'
'Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to come.'
'but I would have you wait a little while longer: for the end of the deeds that you have shared in has not yet come. A day draws near that I have looked for in all the years of my manhood, and when it comes I would have my friends beside me.'
'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right!'
's leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and see such trees as are nowhere else to be found in Middle-earth. You shall come with me and keep your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood and beyond.'
'Alas!'
'First we must tend the fallen,'
'Then let us do first what we must do,'
'And I,'
'There is a strange tale to tell!'
'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,'
'No other folk make such a trampling,'
'Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,'
'Many things,'
'The brooch of an elven-cloak!'
'Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,'
'Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we stay to sleep.'
'The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my eyes can see,'
'The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the prisoners even wearier,'
'My heart bids me go on,'
'But it is still dark,'
'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon or sun,'
'Let us go!'
'Yes,'
'Nay! The riders are little more than five leagues distant,'
'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,'
'You will soon learn the truth,'
'Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!'
'He stands not alone,'
'Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and we could find a use for Gimli'
'But Gandalf was not,'
'If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw them hither,'
'There is no need,'
'Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of Rohan,'
'Why would that make you happy?'
'It is likely enough,'
'No,'
'Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!'
'There was sorcery here right enough,'
'I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,'
'That is just as well,'
'Let us go up and look about us!'
'We have journeyed a long way round,'
'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,'
'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'
'Now!'
'The eagle!'
'Not alone,'
'The Winged Messenger!'
'But the hobbits!'
'What will they do?'
'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?'
'Dark are her words,'
'What then?'
'They have not returned,'
'I see a great smoke,'
'Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home since then,'
'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,'
'I thank you indeed,'
'Many miles lie between,'
'Two?'
'Ai-oi!'
'Twenty-one!'
'Good!'
'Ill enough,'
'Alas! That is evil news,'
'That must be my hope'
'I must go and seek some arrows,'
'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!'
'You have passed my score by one,'
'What has become of the miserable Orcs?'
'And I would give gold to be excused,'
'No, you do not understand,'
'You speak for me, Gimli,'
'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,'
'And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,'
'All in good time,'
'You are full of courtesy this morning,'
'Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind and sky are doing!'
'And set us a pretty riddle,'
'There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!'
'Nay!'
'We have hunted and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use here. We came when we heard the horn-but too late, it seems. I fear you have taken deadly hurt.'
'We cannot leave him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.'
'We have not the time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A cairn we might build.'
'will take all the arrows that I can find, for my quiver is empty.'
'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.'
'There are only two boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.'
'Frodo is no longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat. And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.'
'It seems their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even in their way.'
'Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?'
'Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell in these hills?'
'There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to be flying now away, from this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!'
'He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand, if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see something nearer at hand and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!'
'It is a great company on foot; but I cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the flatness of the plain is hard to measure.'
'Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young folk driven like cattle burns my heart.'
'Certainly they will not rest by night.'
'There will be no escape again, if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed, but first we must overtake them.'
'But we must hold together. I will follow your counsel.'
'The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of Sauron were behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and the dark hills, and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.'
'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!'
'But rest if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown. Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.'
'there are one hundred and five. Yellow is their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.'
'Already they approach.'
'Why do you not speak, silent ones?'
'You would die before your stroke fell.'
'I need them not,'
'I have heard nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is old, old even as the Elves would reckon it.'
'The horses! The horses!'
'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with some sudden gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend that they have long missed.'
'A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs and from the surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For if his legs were tied, how did he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he turned his arms into wings and flew away singing into the trees. It should be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!'
'No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.'
'But nonetheless it has suffered harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.'
'I will feel my breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.'
'We could have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither their road will lead them, till they come to its end.'
'Look!'
'Down in the wood, back in the Way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, passing from tree to tree?'
'We may not shoot an old man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and wait!'
'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.'
'We think that Sam went with him.'
'I shot at him with the bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky. He filled us all with fear. What new terror is this?'
'We have come far to seek them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?'
'But first, it would ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?'
'and little do they mean to those that receive them.'
'Would you have her speak openly to you of your death?'
'It will be a weary walk!'
'See how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his like before.'
'Whether they fled at first in fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?'
'What may that be?'
'Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.'
'for they come from the Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.'
'Yet doubtless Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.'
'I can see a darkness. There are shapes moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land, and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under endless trees were flowing downwards from the hills.'
'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them. The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are too few here, too few.'
'I have done better, though now I must grope for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.'
'But my count is now two dozen. It has been knife-work up here.'
'but not yet hopeless, while we have you with us. Where is Gimli?'
'But I wish that he had come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.'
'Would that this night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.'
'Alas! My axe is notched: the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?'
'But I do not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!'
'There I think you are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.'
'and double to be let out, if I strayed in!'
's Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.'
'But alas! Now we must leave behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We are coming to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?'
'You rascals, you woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A fine hunt you have led us! Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to rescue you! And here we find you feasting and idling-and smoking! Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!'
'Though I would sooner learn how they came by the wine.'
'but his arms are at his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.'
'the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still many things that I should like to know the truth of.'
'We were the hunters, and you should give an account of yourselves to us first.'
'But maybe. if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping one another company again.'
's eyes do not deceive him. Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.'
'Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?'
'I wondered if you had grown wings!'
'So you have come all the way from Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!'
'I have made a bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn together - by your leave.'
