'Come on! Follow me!'
'What in the name of wonder?'
'I don'
'I am sorry,'
'Which way did it go?'
'It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,'
'I don'
'I am afraid that'
'What will happen?'
'Jumped over the Moon!'
'bite'
'There is one crumb of comfort,'
's price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed at least three times the pony'
'I wonder who made this path, and what for,'
'Who was Gil-galad?'
'Don'
'Well, here we are!'
'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?'
'How far is Rivendell?'
'Can the Riders see?'
'Tell us of Gil-galad,'
'I do indeed,'
'Look!'
'I saw something,'
'What is that other river we can see far away there?'
'We cannot go any further,'
'Won'
'Come on, Sam!'
'Well, that'
'There!'
's white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great part of the others'
`More than meal! A feast!'
'I don'
`I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,'
'Yes, and where then?'
`What is the matter, Strider?'
'But what can we do?'
'Cling to my back! I shall need my arms'
`If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil indeed,'
'Well, here we are and all ready,'
`What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?'
'l wish we could get away! '
`I was wrong after all,'
`Steady! Steady! '
'One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you were going to strike the bottom,'
'Lead the way, Gimli! '
`I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close in his little room,'
`Who are they, and what do they say? '
`There!'
`You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,'
`I cannot,'
`That'
'There'
`And one Hobbit! '
's glance, and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir'
`I will do now what I must,'
`That won'
'But he wouldn'
'and that must mark the Road. All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing. Some say they were planted in the old days.'
't you keep up?'
'Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!'
'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?'
'as well as Big Folk. I daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts. My people ride out there now and again.'
'I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers, or so I had heard.'
't forget that you are supposed to be escaping in secret, and are still on the high-road and not very far from the Shire!'
'I am afraid he is out. He said something about going for a breath of air.'
'I have seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!'
's. I will explain later.'
'I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.'
'but it was foolish.'
't hear a word that was said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over. Then I felt terrified, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt home, when something came behind me and I... I fell over.'
't know what came over me.'
'They are not all here yet. And in any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and many people -not until they are desperate, not while all the long leagues of Eriador still lie before us. But their power is in terror, and already some in Bree are in their clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe, the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they left him.'
'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.'
's get hold of Nob!'
's ponies had escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off. But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom'
'll miss them both before long.'
'I am not sure that I like it: it has a - well, rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?'
't blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.'
'I mean, they seem usually to have used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.'
'Do you know any more of that old lay that you spoke of?'
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.'
'or I thought I did - away westwards where the moonlight was falling on the flats beyond the shadow of the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be moving this way.'
'You must trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed, though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and I think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am away!'
'I am afraid this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about him. What are we to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him in Rivendell, if we ever get there?'
't had a song or a tale for days.'
's more stored in your head than you let on about.'
'It is as well you used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!'
's share, I wonder, Frodo?'
`As soon as Gandalf reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.'
'and I wish you could. But we are envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to go on.'
'What are you looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?'
`But you had better tell us about it, and let us know the worst at once.'
't see any sign of them.'
" and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let us go!'
`Steady! You do not know what is inside yet. I will go first.'
'Let the guide go first while you have one.'
's sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving under Aragorn'
'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! '
`We have lugged up your blankets as well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of the baggage in a deep drift of leaves.'
`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.'
't think I should have had the heart to leave it.'
'll say any more,'
's the poor old gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! '
`Not all of us look on boats as wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.'
't we stop him?'
`Not when he had escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.'
'Don'
'Yes,'
'And you have found him also!'
'There was a battle here three nights ago,'
'Why have they come? Have you heard?'
'May I?'
'I have a sword,'
'As a father you shall be to me,'
'Farewell, lord!'
'Good-bye!'
's party came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in amazement. He was on a road the like of which he had never seen before, a great work of men'
'All is well,'
'Then why has Aragorn gone that way?'
'I will be ready,'
'I won'
'Wake up, wake up. Master Holbytla!'
'But the Sun has not risen, yet,'
'But, but, lord,'
'Then tie me on to the back of one, or let me hang on a stirrup, or something,'
's household-men, Riders of renown. Then the king followed with Éomer on his right. He had said farewell to Éowyn above in the Hold, and the memory was grievous; but now he turned his mind to the road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry rode on Stybba with the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king'
'As for that, who can tell?'
'Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say,'
'I do,'
'Thank you indeed!'
'Is the enemy coming then?'
's éored came next; and now Merry noticed that Dernhelm had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at last he was riding just in rear of the king'
'Lord, lord,'
'They have gone up into the Citadel,'
'No,'
's face was anxious. '
'It'
'Are you going to bury me?'
'I'
's room, and there they found Aragorn standing by the bed. '
'Good!'
'I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way '
'No,'
'Dull and dreary indeed!'
'And that may well befall,'
'I wish Merry was here,'
'This was made for just such an hour,'
'I wonder if they think of us at all,'
'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn'
'There are indeed,'
'Thank you!'
'I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,'
'Not another letter you'
'And something'
'Well, we'
'But there aren'
'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,'
'Bless me! It'
'Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate!'
'I'
'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,'
'Bill Ferny,'
'Give me the key!'
'So much for your Big Man,'
'What'
'get-up'
'Leader!'
'Now get on!'
'Well, come along in your own time!'
'We ought to find out first what we'
'Like many that I saw at Isengard,'
'Coming along nicely,'
'And what difference would that have made, pray?'
'Go!'
'Well, we'
'But if there are many of these ruffians,'
'No!'
'Raise the Shire!'
'Have they got any weapons?'
'There you are, Frodo!'
'See you soon!'
'All right!'
'There'
'Who is this Sharkey?'
'Well, you have walked into a trap,'
'Yes indeed; the sooner the better,'
'For it'
'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,'
'Save your breath!'
'Where is that miserable Lotho hiding?'
'And the very last end of the War, I hope,'
'Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants there,'
't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, of course, the king did say that I was to sit by him when he came to his house and tell him all about the Shire.'
'Of all joys this is the least expected!'
's, to waylay the king while he had only a few men about him; but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Théoden'
'All others are up and doing. Come, Master Sluggard, and look at this place while you may!'
'Where is Aragorn?'
'for this is little like my fair house in Edoras. And your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we sit, you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting when I return thither. But come now! Eat and drink, and let us speak together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.'
'but I should like to do anything I could, you know.'
'Receive my service, if you will!'
's party came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in amazement. He was on a road the like of which he had never seen before, a great work of men'
'All is well. It was a weary road for the people to take, torn suddenly from their homes. There were hard words, for it is long since war has driven us from the green fields; but there have been no evil deeds. All is now ordered, as you see. And your lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the hour of your coming.'
't you know anything that would explain it?'
'even if you bid me ride with you on the Paths of the Dead.'
't.'
'In a little while I shall take the road. I release you from my service, but not from my friendship. You shall abide here, and if you will, you shall serve the Lady Éowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.'
' I should be ashamed to stay behind.'
'It is a long way to run; but run I shall, if I cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.'
'and bear them to good fortune! Farewell now, Master Meriadoc! Yet maybe we shall meet again, you and I.'
'But why, lord, did you receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!'
'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark goes: I see it in your face.'
'Thank you, sir, though I do not know your name.'
's command, to stay behind. He wondered, too, if the old King knew that he had been disobeyed and was angry. Perhaps not. There seemed to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm, the Marshal who commanded the éored in which they were riding. He and all his men ignored Merry and pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been just another bag that Dernhelm was carrying. Dernhelm was no comfort: he never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and lonely. Now the time was anxious, and the host was in peril. They were less than a day'
'Are those their drums? I began to think I was imagining them, as no one else seemed to take any notice of them.'
's fear. He opened his eyes and the blackness was lifted from them. There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, and above it loomed the Nazgûl Lord like a shadow of despair. A little to the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the helm of her secrecy, had fallen from her, and her bright hair, released from its bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon her shoulders. Her eyes grey as the sea were hard and fell, and yet tears were on her cheek. A sword was in her hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy'
'if I broke your command, and yet have done no more in your service than to weep at our parting.'
'Where is Éomer? For my eyes darken, and I would see him ere I go. He must be king after me. And I would send word to Éowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see her again, dearer than daughter.'
'she is-'
't bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?'
't use my right arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed him. And my sword burned all away like a piece of wood.'
's all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.'
's not far.'
's head in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and took his friend'
'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the time the battle hangs in the balance.'
'Poor old Merry!'
'll smoke again.'
't ever be able to smoke again without thinking of him, and that day, Pippin, when he rode up to Isengard and was so polite.'
't know.'
'Go at once! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a nuisance to you. But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the right words when a jest is out of place.'
't broken.'
'You must not go to the Havens, Legolas. There will always be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I hope so. Though I feel somehow that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and well over!'
'I will tell you enough for your peace; for I felt not the horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless and frail as I deemed them.'
'll find an easier end. But now I must do my best.'
'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I could see cool sunlight and green grass again!'
's more tales to tell than ours.'
'm a dwarf.'
'I thought you would come to that. Weary of Orthanc? Very weary at last; but not so weary of his tower as he was weary of my voice. Hoom! I gave him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in your speech.'
'will you drink another draught with me before you go?'
'You are welcome to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.'
'In that case I will have my pouch back, which is not yours and has journeyed far with me. Wrap the weed in a rag of your own.'
't finish growing up soon, you are going to find hats and clothes expensive.'
's a general shortage of pipe-weed.'
'so things will soon be cleared up.'
'll let me through that at any time.'
'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost like a dream that has slowly faded.'
't know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should like to know what all this is about, and what a Bucklander like you is doing here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.'
'm pleased to see you alive after all!'
'Two is enough.'
't obey. And when you have opened the gates you will go through them and never return. You are a ruffian and a highway-robber.'
'll have to put us up.'
't allowed.'
'Has it been a bad year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.'
't want me to deal with them!'
'We are going on.'
'I guess that the “Chief” will have a gang of ruffians handy. We had better find someone who will tell us how things are round here.'
'A little footsore, perhaps. We promised to wait for them here.'
'We are not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.'
'If you trouble this village again, you will regret it.'
't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.'
's no good “getting under cover”. That is just what people have been doing, and just what these ruffians like. They will simply come down on us in force, corner us, and then drive us out, or burn us in. No, we have got to do something at once.'
'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. We'
'I knew we should have to fight. Well, they started the killing.'
've got a plan.'
'and I warned you not to come back here. I warn you again: you are standing in the light and you are covered by archers. If you lay a finger on this farmer, or on anyone else, you will be shot at once. Lay down any weapons that you have!'
's dark now. I think the next stroke must wait until morning. Then we must call on the Chief.'
'I heard one of the ruffians speak of him.'
're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!'
'Your fellows from Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the rest are prisoners. Lay down your weapons! Then go back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to break out will be shot.'
's responsible for bringing in these ruffians, and for all the evil they have done.'
've a better.'
'Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds?'
's throat.'
'Lordly'
'I do not know,'
'I suppose I was knocked on the head,'
'But how will they know that we are not Orcs?'
'I don'
'Yes, I had a packet in my pocket,'
'Perhaps,'
'Untie our legs!'
'Now,'
'We must get under cover,'
'You seem to have been doing well, Master Took,'
'I have not,'
'Let'
'We could, if our legs would do it,'
'But the Sun at any rate must peep in sometimes.'
'Low,'
'Hullo!'
'Up we go!'
'The wind'
'An Ent?'
'We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old stories,'
'We aren'
'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,'
'There is quite a lot going on,'
'Hill?'
'Where shall we go?'
'Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,'
'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?'
'And what about yourself?'
'We will come with you,'
'Well, I am afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to the Shire,'
'We usually lie down to sleep,'
'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!'
'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?'
'Maybe, I could,'
'Ah! now you are asking much,'
'It could indeed, lord,'
'That is not surprising,'
'You do not know your danger, Théoden,'
'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink-of clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work - over there.'
'There is the water,'
'He left a message,'
'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you '
'No, I don'
'And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master Gimli,'
'He has not,'
'It is good!'
'No, I am afraid not,'
'The fifth of March in the Shire-reckoning,'
'Unfortunately not,'
'Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,'
'Let me see,'
'We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunír, after night had fallen,'
'Yes, I don'
'Walk warily!'
'We have,'
'He will have guessed, surely?'
'We will!'
'Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf?'
'Thank you!'
'Nothing or a double helping is your way!'
'What'
'Well, Rivendell then,'
'Oh yes, he is!'
'Hullo!'
'Go to sleep!'
'Well, what else could I say?'
'A beautiful, restful night!'
't the Orcs kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?'
's clawlike hand gripped Pippin'
't think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.'
't put my mouth in my pocket!'
'Perhaps; and not only for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it, or not? And what would you give for it?'
'So far so good: but how are we to avoid being spitted?'
't bite them.'
's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!'
's book, if ever I get a chance to report to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain'
'but the forest seems better to me, all the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.'
'I want some air.'
'and if we could breathe properly.'
't imagine animals living here at all, or staying for long.'
'We shall be cold tonight, whichever way we go.'
's go and investigate!'
'Now for a breath of air, and a sight of the land!'
's turned east again. It feels cool up here.'
's your real name?'
're hobbits.'
'm a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.'
'For one thing it would take a long while: my name is growing all the time, and I'
'and even if we tried to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we asked what you are going to do with us, and which side you are on? And did you know Gandalf?'
't we sit here together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us up.'
'We have only a little food.'
'We will do what we can.'
't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the songs?'
'We shall be all right where we are.'
'You sleep long. I have been many a hundred strides already today. Now we will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.'
'He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me to welcome the Lord of Rohan with fitting words. I have done my best.'
'And here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.'
'for it is an art which we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who first grew the true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant…'
's planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.'
'and I was coming to it, but I have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they will find Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of the best there, it was discovered and selected by your humble servants.'
'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that is not nearly enough.'
'We have had enough of Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.'
'But that is another story, which can wait until after lunch.'
's a barrel inside there - very passable. And this is first-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and honey for your bread. Are you content?'
's draughts may be nourishing, but one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.'
'But first-if you have finished eating-you shall fill your pipes and light up. And then for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree again, or in Rivendell.'
's private use. I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?'
't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.'
' With that he plunged into an account of Boromir'
'I never expected to see those again! I marked a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared! At first I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things away as if they burned him.'
'Things began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.'
'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they marched.'
'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.'
's. Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and they were bruising and wounding themselves against it. '
's face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn'
'The afternoon is getting on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.'
't take care.'
'But our discussions began and ended in smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.'
'Were they likely to end any other way?'
't know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.'
'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?'
't know anything about this country.'
'Are you lying on an ant-hill?'
'But you must know how long it is since we left Lórien.'
'But I could sleep anywhere tonight.'
'You were riding with Gandalf.'
's superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go, and he went!'
's saying - the one Sam used to quote: Do not meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.'
'll get information enough, sooner or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?'
't keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good night!'
'Speak!'
't put a lump of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will leave you two together for a while.'
'Some folk have wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf - and there he goes! Instead of being turned into a stone himself to stand here for ever as a warning.'
