'What wouldst thou have more?'
"Near,'
'Aurë entuluva! Day shall come again!'
's host, nor any of the Men of Hador'
'I have not seen him,'
's chair, and he gave it to him, saying: '
'If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast into the sea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory is seen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.'
'Iron Prison, Hell of Iron'
'Demon of Might'
'Land of the Shadow of Horror'
'The Great Echo'
'Mountains of Tyranny'
'dark'
'Dost thou desire all the world for thy belly? I did not vow to give thee that. I am its Lord.'
'with the left only. Open thy right hand.'
'O King to whom all birds are dear, speed now this feathered shaft, and recall some pity for the Noldor in their need!'
's power overshadowed the Northlands; but Barahir would not flee from Dorthonion, and remained contesting the land foot by foot with his enemies. Then Morgoth pursued his people to the death, until few remained; and all the forest of the northward slopes of that land was turned little by little into a region of such dread and dark enchantment that even the Orcs would not enter it unless need drove them, and it was called Deldúwath, and Taur-nu-Fuin, The Forest under Nightshade. The trees that grew there after the burning were black and grim, and their roots were tangled, groping in the dark like claws; and those who strayed among them became lost and blind, and were strangled or pursued to madness by phantoms of terror. At last so desperate was the case of Barahir that Emeldir the Manhearted his wife (whose mind was rather to fight beside her son and her husband than to flee) gathered together all the women and children that were left, and gave arms to those that would bear them; and she led them into the mountains that lay behind, and so by perilous paths, until they came at last with loss and misery to Brethil. Some were there received among the Haladin, but some passed on over the mountains to Dor-lómin and the people of Galdor, Hador'
'There everlastingly thy naked self shall endure the torment of his scorn, pierced by his eyes, unless thou yield to me the mastery of thy tower.'
'the Gasping Dust'
'the Constrainer'
