"Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know, from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they guard their plunder as long as they live (which is practically forever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know a good bit of work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion of the current market value; and they can'
"O yes!"
"Only a bat, I suppose and hope!"
's shape; and he seemed to have grown almost to giant-size in his wrath. The roar of his voice was like drums and guns; and he tossed wolves and goblins from his path like straws and feathers. He fell upon their rear, and broke like a clap of thunder through the ring. The dwarves were making a stand still about their lords upon a low rounded hill. Then Beorn stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of the fray. Swiftly he returned and his wrath was redoubled, so that nothing could withstand him, and no weapon seemed to bite upon him. He scattered the bodyguard, and pulled down Bolg himself and crushed him. Then dismay fell on the Goblins and they fled in all directions. But weariness left their enemies with the coming of new hope, and they pursued them closely, and prevented most of them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest River; and there the greater part of the last fugitives perished, while those that came hardly to the Wood-elves'
't know for certain, but I don'
's get on!"
'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,'
'Yes, and one who journeyed with him,'
'Whence came this?'
'Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for me a while!'
'Hope on then!'
'Not a beggar,'
' “Up with your beard, Durin'
'It'
'There are no tidings,'
'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?'
'Hoom, well, that is fair enough,'
'leaf'
'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!'
'Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was!'
'I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,'
'Look!'
'I am called Strider,'
'But what are we going to do at sunrise?'
's, the Isengarders gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor, and Grishnákh'
'It is rather a strange and sad story,'
'Behold Eorl the Young!'
'It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him said Théoden. '
'I have still this to say,'
'Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,'
'Yes, yes,'
's Deep are vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!'
't cross the Marshes, they go round for miles and miles. Very lucky you came this way. Very lucky you found Sméagol, yes. Follow Sméagol!'
