'What do you mean?'
'Do you think,'
'All right!'
'Hallo!'
'They are - at first sight at any rate,'
'As much as we must,'
'Not a "
'I am being eaten alive!'
'Going to Mordor!'
'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,'
'It is just as I feared,'
'Hush!'
'Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!'
'There are trolls!'
`Hurray!'
`Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,'
`That will soon be cured,'
`That'
`Nothing decided!'
`But that will leave no place for us!'
`Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send me home tied in a sack,'
'But the mountains are ahead of us,'
`Yes I did, sometimes,'
`Well if that isn'
`But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through the drift?'
'And I don'
`I wish I had taken Elrond'
'My heart'
`What are you going to do then? '
'Why doesn'
`What'
`What did you see? '
`Whatever it may be,'
`What did you blush for, Sam? '
`Are these magic cloaks? '
's gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn'
'We must stop him,'
'Stop him! Don'
`Well, I wish Frodo would "
`But where did he go? Where is he? '
'Why not?'
'do you think we may be pursued, tonight?'
't forget that it is safer indoors!'
'Who are you, and what do you want?'
'And the landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he press us to join the company? And why on earth did we behave so foolishly: we ought to have stayed quiet in here.'
't see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how do you know it?'
'But handsome is as handsome does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches.'
'You never mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?'
'but I am dead tired. In spite of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in the dark to look for him.'
'But what will happen when they have penetrated the disguise?'
'Our last short cut through woods nearly ended in disaster.'
'Midgewater! There are more midges than water!'
't come to that!'
'Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.'
'There is a path here!'
'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made the path -and we had better get off it quick.'
'Down in a clearing in the woods not far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They are very large!'
've never heard those words before.'
`Here is our noble cousin! Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!'
`He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible, somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.'
`You have shown your usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.'
`Instead of throwing him out, and clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!'
`We hobbits ought to stick together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There must be someone with intelligence in the party.'
'Then what were you all doing? You were shut up for hours.'
't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.'
'Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this matter it would be well to trust rather to their friendship than to great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord, such as Glorfindel, he could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in him.'
'll follow on my own.'
`We must have turned eastwards in the night.'
't remember them. Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.'
'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.'
's belly.'
't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed the hair off my head!'
'This is a serious journey, not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet! '
`they will be marvellous trees indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot sleep on a perch! '
't roll off,'
`You soon broke down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.'
't leave him.'
`This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up? '
's been away ages now.'
'What is that?'
'It is long since the beacons of the North were lit,'
'Man!'
'Hobbit,'
'Why not? What is wrong with Strider?'
'Kingship?'
'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!'
'Thirteen, thirteen days,'
'So,'
'Little service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men think to find in a hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I will offer it, in payment of my debt.'
'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country '
'I am,'
'And now,'
'It is much to me. But I know already sufficient of these deeds for my own counsel against the menace of the East.'
'You did indeed!'
'Indeed you did your best,'
'Nine o'
'You are Peregrin the Halfling?'
'Well,'
'Er well,'
'Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,'
'At the table small men may do the greater deeds, we say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in the Citadel, and with greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower of guard and is now in posture of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take a morsel in the grey light, and go to our duties at the opening hour. But do not despair!'
'That is what we call ourselves,'
'Good morning!'
'None is rich and fair enough for him,'
'And now for our manger,'
'I do,'
'The Black Riders?'
'I know of them,'
'When?'
'Yes,'
'Then it is far beyond me,'
'I was,'
'Maybe you could, if I let you,'
'No!'
'So I thought,'
'His message is less bad than that, if not good.'
'Forlong! Forlong!'
'Hullo!'
'What is the time?'
'You know quite well,'
'Yes,'
's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones that he knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion. He was however spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position of Éomer, the king'
'Black Riders!'
'He came with me from the land of the Halflings,'
'But,'
'Then I am needed there more than here,'
'Not - the Dark Lord?'
'He is burning, already burning,'
'I will not say farewell, my lord,'
'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,'
'To find Mithrandir,'
'Yes,'
'No,'
'Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,'
'Gandalf, Gandalf! '
'But Faramir!'
'Then Beregond has gone,'
'Lean on me, Merry lad!'
'No, indeed!'
'I'
'Don'
'Past supper-time now,'
'Why not?'
'The Paths of the Dead?'
'I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends in,'
'But if you want to beat the Old Took,'
'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?'
'I'
'Well, no one troubled us,'
'Whatever it is,'
'Oh come!'
'We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer '
'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?'
'Well I am staggered!'
'No,'
'Do what?'
'Hobbiton'
'They won'
'You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old Fredegar!'
'Who'
'Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work!'
'Look! Fire, red fire! Are there dragons in this land? Look, there is another!'
'Man! Indeed not! I am a hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now and again by necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!'
'And Boromir of your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the last he was slain defending me from many foes.'
'Little service can I offer to your lord, but what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.'
' shone out against the sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle glittered as if it were wrought of crystals; and white banners broke and fluttered from the battlements in the morning breeze'
'and at such times you are wont to come, Mithrandir. But though all the signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is drawing nigh, less now to me is that darkness than my own darkness. It has been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?'
'Yes, I think that would be so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help came. Only more orcs.'
'You were there? Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you escape, and yet he did not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs to withstand him?'
'and Boromir was pierced by many. When last I saw him he sank beside a tree and plucked a black-feathered shaft from his side. Then I swooned and was made captive. I saw him no more, and know no more. But I honour his memory, for he was very valiant. He died to save us, my kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.'
' Twitching aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor'
'Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade wrought by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?'
'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell more of them.'
' he wondered, and then he thought how odd it was that he had never thought about it before. Treebeard had said something about wizards, but even then he had not thought of Gandalf as one of them. What was Gandalf? In what far time and place did he come into the world, and when would he leave it? And then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor and Gandalf still looked each other in the eye, as if reading the other'
'I could now eat three breakfasts on end.'
's shoulders and gazing out of the window. Pippin glanced in some wonder at the face now close beside his own, for the sound of that laugh had been gay and merry. Yet in the wizard'
'Do me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you are not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how he is housed. These people are kindly to beasts, for they are a good and wise folk, but they have less skill with horses than some.'
'Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring sunshine. And how I should like breakfast! Do these people ever have it, or is it over? And when do they have dinner, and where?'
'I have known of him all my short life, as you might say; and lately I have travelled far with him. But there is much to read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more than a page or two. Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of our Company, I think, who really knew him.'
'he was a man who went about with us. I think he is in Rohan now.'
'if I may venture to say so, rather a burning question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that? I mean, what are the meal-times, if you understand me, and where is the dining-room, if there is one? And the inns? I looked, but never a one could I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught of ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.'
'But no more than a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but he racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.'
's face. '
'Gandalf will come as soon as he may. He is busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and you resting, I hope, after your long labours.'
'He will have none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no bit, bridle, whip, or thong will tame him. Farewell, Shadowfax! Have patience. Battle is coming.'
'Though you are not far wrong. I am still little more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years yet before I “come of age”, as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.'
'but I will not speak of them now, so near, so near.'
'Have you a guess? For I saw the beacons last night and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a sign that war had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to have slowed up again.'
'It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow of doom, a Fell Rider of the air.'
'No, my heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still upon our knees.'
't escape is worst of all. What a long day it seems already! I should be happier, if we were not obliged to stand and watch, making no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.'
'A pawn did Gandalf say? Perhaps but on the wrong chessboard.'
'I am lonely, to tell you the truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one to talk to or jest with. Perhaps I could really join your company? Are you the captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?'
'Take me back to our room, and if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like - as your guest.'
'wary'
'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.'
'My father farms the lands round Whitwell near Tuckborough in the Shire. I am nearly twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and not likely to grow any more, save sideways.'
'And maybe I could do the same to you: we know some wrestling tricks in my little country. Where, let me tell you, I am considered uncommonly large and strong; and I have never allowed anyone to stand me on my head. So if it came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have to kill you. For when you are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem; and though you may have taken me for a soft stranger-lad and easy prey, let me warn you: I am not, I am a halfling, hard, bold, and wicked!'
't believe what strangers say of themselves either! I am not a fighter. But it would be politer in any case for the challenger to say who he is.'
'for you look like your father. I know him and he sent me to find you.'
'He says that if you would prefer it to standing me on my head, you might show me round the City for a while and cheer my loneliness. I can tell you some tales of far countries in return.'
'What do they say?'
'So ends a fair day in wrath!'
'I thought you had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has been a long day.'
'Why did you bring me here?'
'Well, yes, well enough for my own people. But we have no songs fit for great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom sing of anything more terrible than wind or rain. And most of my songs are about things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.'
's heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones that he knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion. He was however spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position of Éomer, the king'
'and get you there the livery and gear of the Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return when you are clad!'
'They are looking for something, surely? See how they wheel and swoop, always down to that point over there! And can you see something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!'
'How on earth could they be going about with him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?'
' Gandalf answered softly. '
'for I want to see Gandalf very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will not think of dying until he despairs of life. But from my word and your service I do not wish to be released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel, I hope to be here and stand beside you and earn perhaps the arms that you have given me.'
'to the Silent Street.'
'I must find Gandalf at once.'
'Rohan has come!'
'Haste, haste! Do as I have bidden! Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?'
'The Lord went away from the room where Faramir lay; and it was only when he returned that I first thought he was changed, old and broken.'
't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them. So many dreadful things have happened in the City, Merry, that one poor hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.'
'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.'
' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond'
't think he can walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.'
'though I daresay I could bring you something, if they will let me.'
't you tell us some more?'
's not so close as he used to be, though he laughs now more than he talks. For the present Merry and I are busy. We are knights of the City and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.'
'And then Frodo will have to be locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.'
'and that we could speak to them from far away!'
'Thief indeed! What of our claim for waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?'
't try and beat the Bullroarer.'
's been on my mind many a time and the wolves howling and all.'
'd left all trouble behind us.'
'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you can be sure of that.'
'll be better than many places I have seen.'
'Good luck to you!'
'little cock-a-whoop'
'Destroy him I should say.'
'Of all the ends to our journey that is the very last I should have thought of: to have to fight half-orcs and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!'
're only four, even if we are armed.'
'But someone is going to get in again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?'
'll bring you back an army of Tooks in the morning.'
'All that country is alive with our hunters now.'
's your size in hats now?'
'Yes,'
'Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall,'
'Rest while you can, little fool!'
's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglúk'
'Now,'
's face was crushed against its neck; then it jolted off with him. Another treated Merry in the same way. The Orc'
'But that'
'They will make it yet. They will escape,'
'Lembas!'
'You won'
'We mean,'
'Gollum, gollum!'
'No need to try,'
'Not here, the banks are too steep,'
'Yes, it is all very dim, and stuffy, in here,'
'No, nor hobbits,'
'Well, we'
'Yes,'
'Why not make a new line?'
'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,'
'And I'
'Yes,'
'Yes, we do,'
'What do you mean?'
'Entwives?'
'Why are there so few when you have lived in this country so long?'
'How very sad!'
'Where is Entmoot?'
'I wonder where Isengard is?'
'What is Isengard like?'
'Yes!'
'The Ents made up their minds rather quickly, after all, didn'
'One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that'
'Hobbits, if you please, lord,'
'So that is the King of Rohan!'
'Then you shall have it,'
'I lit a bit of fire,'
'Store-room in there, and above the woods, luckily,'
'Maybe; and why not?'
'Ents,'
'We have heaps of it,'
'Half a moment!'
'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all strung-up in an orc-camp,'
'I know,'
'When was that?'
'If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,'
'There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us. '
'Oh yes, I forgot about him,'
'Yes,'
'What'
'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!'
'Saruman, your staff is broken.'
'Here, my lad, I'
'And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?'
'No,'
'Oh, that!'
'You had the luck, Merry,'
'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he'
'But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the affairs of Wizards,'
'You idiotic fool!'
'So this is the thief!'
'I, I took the ball and looked at it,'
'If you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he, how would it be now?'
'How fast is he going?'
'What are you saying, Gandalf?'
'No, not all,'
'Then it was not made, not made'
'What did the Men of old use them for?'
'I wish I had known all this before,'
'It does,'
'But I should like to know-'
'But it was not coming for me, was it?'
'I thought you were going to stop at Helm'
'll wish you had got none before we get home.'
't draw attention to yourself, or I may forget my orders. Curse the Isengarders! Uglúk u bagronk sha pushdug Saruman-glob búbhosh skai'
's surprise he found that much of the talk was intelligible many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of two or three quite different tribes were present, and they could not understand one another'
've got a chance.'
've come on this little expedition, too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?'
've probably all gone with Frodo.'
't forget. Payment is only put off. Leg it!'
've taken anything but our swords.'
'll do nothing, and say nothing.'
'd better have a bit of lembas first.'
'Those cords have cut me like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What about you, Merry?'
'Forward now!'
'm parched.'
'We can at least follow the course of this stream, the Entwash or whatever you call it, and get out again the way we came.'
't imagine what spring would look like here, if it ever comes; still less a spring-cleaning.'
't like the thought of trying to get through it either. Nothing to eat for a hundred miles, I should guess. How are our supplies?'
'The morning must be getting on.'
'm afraid this is only a passing gleam, and it will all go grey again. What a pity! This shaggy old forest looked so different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.'
'who are you? And what are you?'
'we did. He was a great friend, and he was our guide.'
'The story seems to be going on, but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.'
'Shelf? Step?'
'What is true?'
'Are they like you at all?'
' answered Treebeard. '
'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I should like to be there, even if I could not be of much use: I shall never forget Uglúk and the crossing of Rohan.'
'Have a great many died?'
'How was it that they all died?'
'ent-strides'
'You are a hasty folk, I was forgetting; and anyway it is wearisome listening to a speech you do not understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, and they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and that a new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry can stroll about in the dingle, if you like. There is a well of good water, if you need refreshing, away yonder in the north bank. There are still some words to speak before the Moot really begins. I will come and see you again, and tell you how things are going.'
't like being roused. Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.'
'Here you find us sitting on a field of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came by a few well-earned comforts!'
's guard-house--over there under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.'
'It cheered us up in the fogs. There were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could find was wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or four days old, I am afraid.'
's content.'
'you have seen some at a distance, already-they saw you at any rate, and reported that you were on the way-and you will see many others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own ideas.'
'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.'
'Strider the Ranger has come back!'
'Let me see, what is today?'
'I have kept it safe, for it is a very precious thing.'
'It was a wrench to let it go; but what else could I do?'
'He seems at one time to have got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began, the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don'
"Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!"
's; no, the year before, of course, now: a good year.'
'Will he shoot at us, and pour fire out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?'
'I wish I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are not wanted.'
'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.'
'm not comfortable. I wonder how long it is since I slept in a bed?'
'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.'
' Pippin'
'I should like a bit of information as well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.'
'Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, after all,'
'm a bit calmer. So I may as well have a look first. Not just here though!'
' The wizard'
't. And then he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and, and that is all I remember.'
'And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and clear. Then the stars went in and out-they were cut off by things with wings. Very big, I think, really; but in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round the tower. I thought there were nine of them. One began to fly straight towards me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible - no, no! I can'
'Fast by the wind, but very smooth. And how light his footfalls are!'
't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What is it about - the seven stars and seven stones?'
'by the Enemy?'
'I had no notion of what I was doing.'
'If all the seven stones were laid out before me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.'
". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?'
't know that I had… '
'Where are you going then?'
