` "
`Nor is it now, I will swear,'
`The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,'
'True indeed!'
'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, Gandalf,'
`It is a name of ill omen,'
`The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron'
'Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,'
'But we have not journeyed far south yet,'
"for that is not very far off."
'The work will be finished ere evening,'
'Oh,'
'One moment!'
'All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill.'
'I shall be glad to come,'
'I cannot say yet,'
's stirrup. Éomer and his esquire rode back to the rear. Merry felt more like unneeded baggage than ever, and he wondered, if there was a fight, what he should do. Supposing the king'
'Halbarad Dúnadan, Ranger of the North I am,'
'They are a strange company, these newcomers,'
'They answered a summons, as you heard,'
'Gladly will I take it,'
'Three days,'
'The Paths of the Dead!'
'What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot say,'
'Maybe,'
'They give him no rest,'
'Nay,'
'Wind is changing!'
'They will indeed,'
'It is good to learn that they are still alive,'
'Go!'
'That is well,'
'Well, I like that!'
'Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton'
's eye, I am told, though he has given him to Mithrandir for his services. I think his new master loves the beast better than he loves many men, and if his good will is of any value to this city, you will treat Shadowfax with all honour: with greater kindness than you have treated this hobbit, if it is possible.'
'Take your sword and bear it unto good fortune!'
' He looked up, and it seemed that he had made some decision; his face was less troubled. Then, by our leave, lord, I must take new counsel for myself and my kindred. We must ride our own road, and no longer in secret. For me the time of stealth has passed. I will ride east by the swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.'
'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death maybe, but I deem that she yet lives.'
'The Horse-lords'
'The Horse-country'
'They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at'
'Truly!'
'Your pardon, Éomer!'
'A strange name for a strange folk,'
'So I thought,'
'The Ents!'
'Hail Aragorn son of Arathorn!'
'He was,'
'Peace!'
'Do not follow me yet!'
'But he shall not turn us back! Halt we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering cloud. But north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.'
'You will make a rider yet.'
'Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland: indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!'
'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?'
'It is now almost due west of us. That way lies Isengard.'
'The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!'
'A fine old fellow. Very polite.'
