'Dressed up like this, sir?'
'No,'
'I did not know,'
'Weathertop?'
'I can carry enough for two,'
'What do they live on when they can'
'There was a lot more,'
'Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,'
'Maybe,'
'Then tell us some other tale of the old days,'
'What has happened? Where is the pale king?'
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!'
'What is the matter with my master?'
'Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,'
'We will come and look at them,'
'Not since Weathertop,'
'I don'
'I hope not,'
'My master is sick and wounded,'
'Where'
'Yes, they are all safe and sound,'
`It'
`I can take you to them, sir,'
`Begging your pardon,'
`But you won'
'Ah!'
'Ah!'
'I do,'
'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose: linen; various small belongings of his master'
'Rope!'
`What'
`Lie flat and still!'
'Too warm, I shouldn'
'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn'
`Shelter!'
'Then we must go on, if there is a way,'
'Nor me,'
`What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin? '
`Poor old Bill! '
'He'
`Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick! '
`Rope! '
`Poor old Bill! '
`There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time '
`Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? '
'Come with me, Frodo! '
`They'
`Once I do get to sleep,'
'Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you'
`You'
'I am afraid that'
'I did,'
`There'
`You have not tried,'
`What are these? '
'You don'
`Swans! '
`That I won'
`That'
`It'
's hood; and a third stood fast in the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry'
`Gollum'
`I can'
'They'
`This is bad!'
`An hour since he vanished! '
`Whoa, Sam Gamgee! '
'Steady, Gamgee! '
`Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming! '
`Save me, Mr. Frodo! '
'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that'
`Safely! '
`Not as certain as being left behind,'
`Of course it is,'
'Just hold on a moment, and I'
`So all my plan is spoilt! '
`Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,'
'Where are my clothes?'
'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. On Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming up the Greenway from the south.'
'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.'
's permission we will call that settled. Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.'
'You do make me feel uncomfortable and lonesome, Strider!'
'I learned it from Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.'
't learn that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way myself!'
'I do not like this place either; but I cannot think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least we are out of sight for the moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.'
" as I can think of, bar shouting.'
'a tale about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.'
's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.'
't what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.'
't want to be neither!'
't go on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.'
'And are the others all right?'
'He has no more doubts now.'
's fine to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.'
'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.'
's content. Come on, guide me round the corners!'
't go in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.'
`but I was just wondering if you would be wanting anything.'
`A nice pickle we have landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!'
'll just wait long enough for winter to come.'
's what I often wonder.'
'll warrant); flint and tinder; woollen hose: linen; various small belongings of his master'
't get it now.'
's turn that day to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The swish of the pony'
' Maps conveyed nothing to Sam'
's falling. I wish this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.'
`If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof make a house.'
`but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls! '
`But when the Door opens I do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.'
'd be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these wolves about.'
't got it! '
't live in these darksome holes surely? '
`I should like to learn it. In Moria, in Khazad-dûm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still? '
's wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn'
'Many have received worse than this in payment for the slaying of their first orc. The cut is not poisoned, as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.'
't you hear their voices? '
'll drop off, if you take my meaning.'
`I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside a song. if you take my meaning.'
't like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me what I would do if she gave me the chance of flying back home to the Shire to a nice little hole with-with a bit of garden of my own.'
`I asked you the same question once before-it seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more of them since then.'
'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo! '
've got to go on, then we'
`Yet I hope very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.'
'For this is what your folk would call magic. I believe; though I do not understand clearly what they mean; and they seem also to use the same word of the deceits of the Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not say that you wished to see Elf-magic? '
're willing.'
's going to catch it hot! '
's in the family as you might say.'
`but also it may stand for garden in your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you. Though you should find all barren and laid waste, there will be few gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and catch a glimpse far off of Lórien, that you have seen only in our winter. For our spring and our summer are gone by, and they will never be seen on earth again save in memory.'
`And mighty big ones too! '
't a dream. Funny it was anyway.'
't seen or thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlórien.'
't a log, for it had paddle-feet, like a swan'
't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lórien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to the flet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report of the Elves that went after the orc-band? '
'll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.'
's nothing to tell, or not much. I thought I heard some soft plashing and a sniffing noise, a while back; but you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.'
`And a nice place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! '
`but this seems to be a lucky one. Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.'
'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! '
's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.'
's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your pardon, Master Boromir,'
's Baggins.'
`And what shall we do, if you prove right? '
't ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!'
`We must try and find him at once. Come on! '
`None of us should be alone. There is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon Hen, to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed, Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! '
`Now take my hand! '
't see your hand.'
't a guessed right, where would you be now? '
'd have been the death of me.'
' said Frodo and I could not have borne that.'
's the only way.'
'll knock holes in all the boats first.'
' He rushed to the camping place, fished out his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it when he emptied the boat of his companions'
't suppose we shall see them again.'
'It'
`A dead end,'
`Beyond all towers strong and high,'
`You'
'All right, Mr. Frodo,'
'I'
`Well, Mr. Frodo, I'
`No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that bred them can only mock, it cannot make: not real new things of its own. I don'
`I can'
'But we can'
'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,'
'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of water, I'
'It'
'But we may have some to do,'
'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'
'I didn'
'I do. But I think we'
'Orc-gear'
'I don'
'Well!'
'I'
'Well, I suppose we must be going on again,'
'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,'
'Well, Mr. Frodo,'
'Water, water!'
'I can'
's eyes. '
'I don'
'I'
's legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled off along the climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it had looked at first. By fortune the fires that had poured forth in the great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the road on this side was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled away or was crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward fox a space. There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain'
'Look out!'
'Yes, I must go on,'
'Now!'
's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many times deserved; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do. But deep in his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike this thing lying in the dust, forlorn, ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum'
'Master!'
'I have come,'
'Master!'
'Noon?'
'The King?'
'What shall we wear?'
'Ent-draughts?'
'Ah!'
'Almost the last drop of the Smaug vintage,'
'Ah!'
'I can guess some of it,'
'Neat work, Bill,'
'All right, all right!'
'You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with such nonsense,'
'But you can give it up, stop Shirriffing, if it has stopped being a respectable job,'
'If I hear not allowed much oftener,'
'Like that friend of Bill Ferny'
'Nay! It'
'Well!'
'What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie?'
'This is worse than Mordor!'
'And that'
'I shan'
'What can I do with this?'
'On what?'
'But I'
'It will be Bilbo'
'So he will!'
'I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and see Mr. Bilbo,'
'Why, you have nearly finished it, Mr. Frodo!'
'Where are you going, Master?'
' He drew Sting and ran towards the open gate. But just as he was about to pass under its great arch he felt a shock: as if he had run into some web like Shelob'
`Tell Captain Shagrat that the great Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!'
'd better follow these lights.'
't be the top of the tower. But what can I do now?'
've come.'
's no time to look for them,'
'not without wings.'
's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my eyes just closed down on their own.'
't win through by fighting.'
't like to think of you with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.'
'Let me drink first Mr. Frodo,'
's poisonous, or something that will show its badness quick, well, better me than you, master, if you understand me.'
's very cold!'
's hide!'
's bag of Faramir'
's such a lot of folk there must be wells or water, not to mention food. And these are Men not Orcs, or my eyes are all wrong.'
't cross all that open country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.'
'll see, Mr. Frodo.'
'If this nice friendliness would spread about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.'
'but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot l could shout.'
't it enough to have orcs by the thousand without that stinking villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been shot!'
'Well, we can but wait and see.'
'Hi, you! Get up!'
'll take a week, if it takes a day, with Mr. Frodo as he is.'
'It is such a weight to carry, such a weight.'
'You know I would, and gladly, as long as I have any strength.'
't going to mess with my pans!'
'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop arguing!'
'and I will!'
're going.'
'd have to say I was beaten in the end.'
'll deal with him. Go on!'
'At last I can deal with you!'
's hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many times deserved; and also it seemed the only safe thing to do. But deep in his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike this thing lying in the dust, forlorn, ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum'
'Frodo! Master!'
's long hands draw upwards to his mouth; his white fangs gleamed, and then snapped as they bit. Frodo gave a cry, and there he was, fallen upon his knees at the chasm'
' said Frodo; and they rose and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they passed towards the Mountain'
't a dream! Then where are we?'
'Noon of what day?'
'What king, and who is he?'
's gifts: your glass, Frodo, and your box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.'
'O great glory and splendour! And all my wishes have come true!'
'There you go about Ents again; but what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all these things sized up!'
's time we got back.'
'I wish I was going back to Lórien!'
'May come in useful, if you think of getting married, Sam.'
'But he says your beer is always good.'
'What I saw in the Mirror: trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row. I ought to have hurried back quicker.'
's sleep and forget it till morning!'
'Calling your Chief Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you Shirriffs look a lot of Tom-fools.'
'You used to like the inside of an inn better than the outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.'
's different.'
'm going to get angry.'
'Who sent you to Frogmorton?'
's all this to-do?'
'Go on now! But take care of yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!'
's come of him, Mr. Cotton?'
've cut down the Party Tree!'
've work to do in the Shire now.'
'Much worse in a way. It comes home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it was all ruined.'
's a good riddance.'
'll take a lot of time and work.'
's a marvel!'
'I thought you were going to enjoy the Shire, too. for years and years, after all you have done.'
'The horn of Boromir!'
`What a fix! '
'Or another and another and another,'
`Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo?'
`Nor me,'
'I hope that'
'A nasty drop, I'
'And that'
`Very good! '
`I don'
'Easy said,'
`Come back! Come back! '
'I'
`Better luck if I'
`Ah! Who would? '
'Very well,'
`I bet it didn'
'They do cheer the heart, don'
'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I think,'
`Do you think he can see us? '
`Then why is he coming down just here? '
`Well, I'
`It doesn'
`Well, what'
`Oh hasn'
'Wait a bit, Gollum!'
'Here, what are you doing? '
'Come back now!'
'I dunno,'
`About the food,'
'Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes,'
'Not a bird! '
`No, no birds,'
`Come, Mr. Frodo! '
'But that is an age and more ago,'
'Three precious little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,'
'What is it? '
`High time! '
'Go on with you! '
`Well, here we are! '
'Then what the plague did you bring us here for? '
's guess was that the Sméagol and Gollum halves (or what in his own mind he called Slinker and Stinker) had made a truce and a temporary alliance: neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring; both wished to keep Frodo from capture, and under their eye, as long as possible - at any rate as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on his '
`But how will that help us? '
`So that'
'You seem to know a lot about what He'
`Just so! '
`I don'
`Were there any oliphaunts?'
`Hi! Gollum! '
'Never you mind,'
`Mustn'
'I don'
`Now, now! '
`Gollum!'
`Sméagol'
`Oh you'
'A present from Sméagol,'
'Wheew! Gollum! '
`Oh well, I suppose he'
'Meaning we'
`Go quietly when you must!'
`No, before breakfast,'
'Save me! '
`No! '
`So do I,'
`Hungry again already?'
`Oh come! '
'We aren'
`Need we think about it yet?'
'I wonder what'
`Well, I can'
's head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. `
`Come, Mr. Frodo,'
'And what after that? '
'I thought you said there was a tunnel,'
'I don'
`I wonder when we'
'I wouldn'
`Now, Mr. Frodo,'
`I don'
'All the same, I'
`I daresay,'
'O very well,'
's face bending over him. `
'D'
`And what makes the smell, I wonder,'
`Which way has Gollum gone? '
`He'
'And quick! '
'Master, master!'
'Master, master!'
's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and on his left arm, hanging by its thong, was Faramir'
's head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior'
`Master, dear master! '
`Good-bye, master, my dear! '
`Will he?'
's: it was rather large and heavy. This then is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not do so. He guessed his master s mind and came back here before Frodo had gone. He did not find it easy to leave Sam behind!'
'll warrant. Phew! Can you smell it?'
've come the wrong way.'
'll give him gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.'
'I wish we could be rid of him for good!'
't fly can jump!'
's better than climbing.'
'm going first.'
's nowhere to put your feet or your hands?'
'Better wait till morning and more light.'
'Master!'
" he said: Haldir, or one of those folk. And he spoke right.'
'Five, ten, twenty, thirty ells, more or less,'
's tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Packs close too, and as light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!'
's get it over! '
've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.'
`It goes hard parting with anything I brought out of the Elf-country. Made by Galadriel herself, too, maybe. Galadriel,'
't neither. Not a strand!'
's beginning to give quite a light.'
've set a little puzzle for that footpad, anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!'
`We might find some nook there, or even a cave or something.'
'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at him! Like a nasty crawling spider on a wall.'
't suppose we could give him the slip now anyway.'
's his Precious? Does he mean the'
't come sneaking after us no more, I say.'
's his plan.'
's mood and that the matter was beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo'
's round your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.'
've got the rope handy.'
't: not Sam Gamgee for one.'
's behaviour had made him attend to its flavour again. But he did not feel comfortable. Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a diner'
't wake up never again.'
'Hi! Come back!'
's hungry.'
've been a bit free with it so far.'
's that dratted creature?'
'Brr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch! '
're all round us now. Are we trapped? Who are they? '
'Dead faces! '
't be really there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? '
's the need to sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and master stinks; the whole place stinks.'
'Curse him! I wish he was choked!'
's get it over! '
'd have to get a wash first, or he wouldn'
't empty, is it? '
'that we should go another long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one, when we get there, if we ever do? '
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? '
's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.'
' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught a green gleam in Gollum'
'speaking poetry'
's always ready to help. Could you find anything fit for a hungry hobbit? '
'll carve you into mincemeat.'
't do it!'
'm going to stew these coneys.'
's any comfort to you.'
`is some herbs and roots, especially taters - not to mention bread. Herbs we can manage, seemingly.'
'Go to sleep!'
`Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is the time? '
's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.'
't let two tired travellers rest.'
'll look after himself.'
's first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead face. He wondered what the man'
'll have a bit of sleep.'
`No need to disturb my sleep. I was walking all night.'
's aid if needed. He could see Faramir'
's like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! Now I can keep awake long enough to eat a bit.'
`You took the chance, sir.'
`And nothing will ever be all right where that piece of misery is.'
'll still be hours of dark then time enough for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.'
'll go if we must.'
're not going to move any more today, if day it is?'
's that? Thunder, or drums, or what is it? '
't he come back yet?'
's ever going to be any use, which I doubt.'
's hope, as my Gaffer used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.'
't be tea-time even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.'
'Longer, did you say? '
't there a tunnel or something to go through? '
'As you knew all along, I suppose? '
't they? '
't any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard. And anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.'
't like it.'
't be one to say that. Things done and over and made into part of the great tales are different. Why, even Gollum might be good in a tale, better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he used to like tales himself once, by his own account. I wonder if he thinks he'
't even a bit of moss! '
's gone to fetch them, Orcs or whatever they are?'
'But where have you been to - sneaking off and sneaking back, you old villain? '
's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? '
' Gently he smoothed the hair back from Frodo'
't mind bad smells.'
'll warrant, with a hundred years of their filth in it.'
't he wait? '
'll be sorry for it.'
's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel something looking at us.'
'I wish old Tom was near us now!'
's gift! The star-glass! A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!'
's get out of this foul hole!'
'em! '
`Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite him quick! '
'll be through-through before any one can stop us! '
'm'
's throat loosened; but his fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum. Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on Gollum'
'll not leave you again. Rest you quiet till I come; and may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye! '
'll be too late again.'
's body for some foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it, but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains'
't trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? '
've got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow! '
's loose!'
