'There is still hope,'
"Then about a year ago a messenger came to Dáin, but not from Moria - from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dáin to his gate. The Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would give for it, such as he gave of old. And he asked urgently concerning hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt. "
`You have done well to come,'
` "
'He is in prison, but no worse,'
`Well, well, he is gone,'
' "
'Then he must be a noble beast indeed,'
`I know little of Iarwain save the name,'
'And that we shall not find on the roads to the Sea,'
'Alas, no,'
`Did you not hear me, Glóin?'
'We know not for certain,'
`Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,'
`I do call it the wind,'
'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `
`That what should be shall be,'
`Wise the Lady Galadriel may be,'
'Miserable trickster!'
"and get from him, willing or no, a little ring, the least of rings, that once he stole. It is but a trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good will. Find it, and three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be returned to you, and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief, whether he still lives and where, and you shall have great reward and lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse, and things will not seem so well. Do you refuse?"
"'
's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another reason why the Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it will be a danger even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring to wield it.'
'I do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached him, and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky above you must beware as you go on your way.'
`Gandalf is here. Fly, if you value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.'
's creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of the Sea, we should find no longer any shelter there. It is said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are far north and west, beyond the land of the Halflings. But where that may be, though the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.'
'That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,'
'Because I must,'
'But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,'
'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dûr the most fell of all his captains is already master of your outer walls,'
'Strange indeed,'
'I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg,'
'I am the Mouth of Sauron.'
'So!'
'I do not wish to deny them,'
'Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron!'
'These we will take!'
's Road from Barad-dûr to the Sammath Naur, the Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower'
'The fourteenth of the New Year,'
'Not for long now,'
's part; and they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the barren hills. And the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of Erech and all places where that people lingered. But that way I must go, since there are none living to help me.'
's heir of Gondor.'
's domination, and they worshipped him, being enamoured of evil knowledge. And he entered the service of the Dark Tower when it first rose again, and because of his cunning he grew ever higher in the Lord'
'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!'
's will to work for another effort. At length, stooping and caressing Frodo'
's shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults of the Mountain'
'The Ring-bearer has fulfilled his Quest.'
'The Lords of the West have plotted against us. They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!'
'The Dark Tower'
'Hill of Sorcery'
'Mountain of Blazing Fire'
'Isle of Werewolves'
'That is a small price for so great a treachery. So shall it surely be. Say on!'
'It is he whose name is not now spoken; for the Valar have deceived you concerning him, putting forward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of their hearts, seeking to enchain Men in servitude to themselves. For they are the oracle of this Eru, which speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall yet prevail, and he will deliver you from this phantom; and his name is Melkor, Lord of All, Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.'
'Avallónë is vanished from the Earth and the Land of Aman is taken away, and in the world of this present darkness they cannot be found. Yet once they were, and therefore they still are, in true being and in the whole shape of the world as at first it was devised.'
's. And they became for ever invisible save to him that wore the Ruling Ring, and they entered into the realm of shadows. The Nazgûl were they, the Ringwraiths, the Enemy'
'The Abhorred'
'Nay!'
'Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase '
'I have been among them,'
'First tell me whom you serve,'
'I serve no man,'
'The doom of choice,'
'Quickly?'
'We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted. Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he fled into dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin'
'It may,'
'No,'
`It'
'That is easy to read.'
's too. The palantíri came from beyond Westernesse from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Fëanor himself, maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is nothing that Sauron cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for Saruman! It was his downfall, as I now perceive. Perilous to us all are the devices of an art deeper than we possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for his own profit. No word did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We had not yet given thought to the fate of the palantíri of Gondor in its ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in Gondor they were a secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of lore among the Dúnedain.'
" '
