'You had better do something quick!'
'Well?'
'Several things,'
'Excellent!'
'Well answered!'
'It would have been better,'
'I wonder,'
'With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I'
'The lesson in caution has been well learned,'
'He did!'
'Then who would you take up with?'
'They come from Mordor,'
'He has been doing that for many years,'
'Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?'
'I see,'
'We shall see,'
'I hope so,'
'Dark times,'
'Yes,'
'I wonder,'
'This is where we leave the open and take to cover,'
'Ah, but you had not got me with you then,'
'I do not know,'
'That is Weathertop,'
'Do not speak of such things!'
'Do not speak that name so loudly!'
'Perhaps,'
'It may,'
'I do not know, but I fear the worst,'
'Yes,'
'Hadn'
'Keep close to the fire, with your faces outward!'
'And more deadly to Frodo was this!'
'We shall see,'
'There is no need, I think,'
'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew about trolls,'
'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,'
`They call me that in Bree,'
`And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and countrymen give us scornful names. "
` "
'I am very pleased to meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.'
'Why did you do that? Worse than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or should I say your finger?'
'but we had better wait until the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should like a quiet word with you.'
'and though he may have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.'
'But, of course, I have my price.'
'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may be glad to grant it, when you have heard me.'
'and though I cannot disappear, I have hunted many wild and wary things and I can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came out of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadil or to one another, but one thing interested me. Please remember, said one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe Mr. Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but if so, I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.'
'I would have stopped your going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me in to see you, or take a message.'
'Accident, then. That accident has made your position dangerous.'
'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You must make up your mind. I will answer some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still here it is---'
'And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.'
'A fat innkeeper who only remembers his own name because people shout it at him all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?'
'From Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.'
'Not much, Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the name of Baggins, till he is far away.'
'that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.'
'And you would die first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.'
'but I am afraid my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!'
'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.'
'I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.'
' he said. '
'But do not give up hope! Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know - as a rule you can only see his jokes and toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.'
'The Black Breath. The Riders must have left their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill Ferny; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before we leave Bree.'
'Let us hope to hold the fort till morning.'
'But for the present you may be left in peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be packed in a few minutes.'
'you had better do that. I am afraid we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown a horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.'
's door. But there does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?'
't go wrong.'
'It is too distant to make out. It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.'
'I think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can, to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop from the north and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.'
'Who was Gil-galad?'
'It is pan of the lay that is called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have translated it. I never knew that.'
'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.'
'that they stood for G3, and were a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.'
'For myself, I believe that he was here, and was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we can '
'The enemy is here!'
'I wish I had waited and explored the ground down here myself,'
't like this hole: it makes my heart sink somehow.'
'You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the fire as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but fire shall serve for both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can all things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it. Fire is our friend in the wilderness.'
'So also does Frodo, for it concerns us closely.'
'I do not think that tale should be told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.'
'Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!'
's that?'
'We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves call Mitheithel. It flows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater away in the South. Some call it the Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the Sea. There is no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors, except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.'
'Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land. Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of Angmar. But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North Kingdom to its end. But that is now so long ago that the hills have forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.'
'There is nothing more that I can do in the wilderness; and it is chiefly because of his wound that I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.'
't think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.'
'Get up, old stone!'
's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!'
'This is Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of Elrond,'
`Let me hear it!'
" I am to one fat man who lives within a day'
't look like a cloud,'
'Twice now, lord, I have heard of the Paths of the Dead,'
'Verily, for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and Envinyatar, the Renewer'
'Well then,'
'Don'
'Well, if that isn'
'Nob, you woolly-pated ninny!'
'Of course he does. He'
's face was a study in wonder. The eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped. '
'll be arriving soon himself anyway.'
't listen to me. How did you do it?'
't told me anything about it.'
'It is a long way, is it not, from Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours has been the darkest road.'
't doubt. A fine beast, as I said when I first set eyes on him. Well, come in! Make yourselves at home!'
't you got that into your head yet?'
'Him with a crown and all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?'
'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,'
'I wish Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,'
'Look!'
'He has never been away,'
'All right, I'
`The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!'
'I came out of the North. I am hunting Orcs.'
'That is no name for a Man that you give. And strange too is your raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?'
't that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!'
'd won the battle!'
' nonsense, and all wide of my mark.'
