'Frodo Baggins at your service and your family'
`Balin will find no ring in Moria,'
"I suppose you will all stay to supper?"
"Now for some music!"
"Where are you going?"
"I don'
"It may have been secret once,"
"Indeed I will,"
"We might go from there up along the River Running,"
"Bless me!"
"The few of us that were well outside sat and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and there we were unexpectedly joined by my father and my grandfather with singed beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. When I asked how they had got away, they told me to hold my tongue, and said that one day in the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn our livings as best we could up and down the lands, often enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or even coalmining. But we have never forgotten our stolen treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not so badly off"
"Curse his name, yes,"
"True, true,"
"Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I have chosen my own time and way of handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble I had to find you. Your father could not remember his own name when he gave me the paper, and he never told me yours; so on the whole I think I ought to be praised and thanked. Here it is,"
"Whatever were you doing there?"
"Never you mind. I was finding things out, as usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was. Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but it was too late. He was witless and wandering, and had forgotten almost everything except the map and the key."
"Before we go, I suppose you mean,"
"Up you two get, and off we go!"
"Exactly!"
"Thank you!"
"Don'
"Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?"
"Durin, Durin!"
"The first day of the dwarves'
"This won'
"What do you mean by it?"
"Urn!"
"We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live on the East side of these truly hospitable mountains,"
"He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!"
"Murderers'
"About turn!"
"What about the horse, then?"
"Don'
"Very comforting you are to be sure,"
"Is there no end to this accursed forest?"
"You need not try,"
"Where is Thorin?"
"We did not attack them,"
's heart thumped every time one of them bumped into another, or grunted or whispered in the dark. "
"Well! Here we are!"
"I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain! I return!"
"It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned without cause as we journeyed back to our own land,"
"Not at any rate until the songs have come true!"
"There lies all that is left of Dale,"
"Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn,"
"That'
"What then do you propose we should do, Mr. Baggins?"
"Leave him alone!"
"You are very gloomy, Mr. Baggins!"
"We knew it would be a desperate venture,"
"The Arkenstone! The Arkenstone!"
"Now what on earth or under it has happened?"
's distant voice. "
'"
"This is the great chamber of Thror,"
"There is the birth of the Running River,"
"Come, come!"
"We must take our chance of that,"
"Something strange is happening,"
"Back now to the Mountain!"
"Who are you,"
"You put your worst cause last and in the chief place,"
"I daresay; but I am bound here till midnight,"
"A share in the profits, mind you,"
"Bilbo Baggins!"
"That will be Dain!"
"My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns,"
'How came you by it?"
"Be off!"
"No!"
't get through the business till late, and we must have some music first. Now to clear up!"
"Bring out the instruments!"
"I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred."
"but how do we know that it is secret any longer? Old Smaug had lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about those caves."
"Now things begin to look more hopeful. This news alters them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. We thought of going East, as quiet and careful as we could, as far as the Long Lake. After that the trouble would begin."
"and so to the ruins of Dale-the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain. But we none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the South of the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed."
"supposing the burglar-expert gives us some ideas or suggestions."
't we been talking about all this for hours?"
'em."
"and where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?"
's all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?"
"but could you be more plain?"
"It is long enough without watering it."
"May it soon cleave goblins once again!"
"He was the father of the fathers of the eldest race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir."
's Day when the last moon of Autumn and the sun are in the sky together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess when such a time will come again."
't get blown off or drowned, or struck by lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a football."
's people, because of the war which you have heard mentioned, but which does not come into this tale; and anyway goblins don'
't be surprised to learn! Murderers and friends of Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to say?"
"Of the things which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in any way whatever."
's have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!"
' and everybody ought to have followed. We thought everybody had. There was no time to count, as you know quite well, till we had dashed through the gate-guards, out of the lower door, and helter-skelter down here. And here we are-without the burglar, confusticate him!"
't mention sending that back."
"It will get lighter all too soon. Before long I expect we shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short."
't come with us, you had better get off without any more talk!"
't waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you are no joke to carry even after weeks of short commons."
"we came to beg, because we were starving."
"And I suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have arranged a more comfortable journey. Still-all very much at your service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and recovered. In the meanwhile what next?"
"Fili and Kili of the race of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West."
' realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to the raft-men of the king."
"The thrushes are good and friendly-this is a very old bird indeed, and is maybe the last left of the ancient breed that used to live about here, tame to the hands of my father and grandfather. They were a long-lived and magical race, and this might even be one of those that were alive then, a couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used to have the trick of understanding their language, and used them for messengers to fly to the Men of the Lake and elsewhere."
"Why has not Smaug blocked the lower end, then, if he is so eager to keep us out? He has not, or we should have heard him."
"and we know that still; and I still think that when we have won it will be time enough to think what to do about it. As for your share, Mr. Baggins, I assure you we are more than grateful and you shall choose you own fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I admit the difficulties are great-the lands have not become less wild with the passing of time, rather the reverse-but we will do whatever we can for you, and take our share of the cost when the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!"
"I must feel the wind on my face soon or die. I think I would rather be smashed by Smaug in the open than suffocate in here!"
"Certainly not the dragon, or he would not go on squeaking."
"What next? We are armed, but what good has any armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won back. We are not looking for gold yet, but for a way of escape; and we have tempted luck too long!"
"Let us go! I will guide you. Not in a thousand years should I forget the ways of this palace."
's coming. Though all the old adornments were long mouldered or destroyed, and though all was befouled and blasted with the comings and goings of the monster, Thorin knew every passage and every turn. They climbed long stairs, and turned and went down wide echoing ways, and turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more'
"From here it hastens to the Gate. Let us follow it!"
't call my place a nasty hole! You wait till it has been cleaned and redecorated!"
"We can go no further to-day."
"The time has gone for the autumn wanderings; and these are birds that dwell always in the land; there are starlings and flocks of finches; and far off there are many carrion birds as if a battle were afoot!"
"We have little time to lose."
"that come as if in war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?"
"Who are you that come armed for war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?"
"To the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because Smaug who stole it from us also robbed him of life or home. The treasure was not his that his evil deeds should be amended with a share of it. The price of the goods and the assistance that we received of the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time. But nothing will we give, not even a loaf'
"and they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my friends behind them and winter upon them, they will perhaps be in softer mood to parley with."
"Is there then nothing for which you would yield any of your gold?"
"But how came you by the heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question of thieves?"
"You miserable hobbit! You undersized-burglar!"
" he said. "
"You have mail upon you, which was made by my folk, and is too good for you. It cannot be pierced .by arrows; but if you do not hasten, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!"
"I have brought him."
"There is more in you of good than you know, child of the kindly West. Some courage and some wisdom, blended in measure. If more of us valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!"
