'It is,'
'It is not as I would have it,'
'For a little while,'
'We will make ready to ride,'
'I am troubled in mind, lord,'
'You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,'
'This journey is over, maybe,'
'The winged Shadow?'
'It is well,'
'And you, Éowyn,'
'You are grieved, daughter,'
'Let him come!'
'The Red Arrow!'
'Dark tidings,'
'Then call the heralds, Éomer,'
'But we ride on horses tall and swift,'
'This is no journey for such steeds as Stybba, as I have told you '
'I received you for your safe-keeping,'
'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,'
'So be it!'
'Who knows?'
'Once again I thank you, Ghân-buri-Ghân of the woods,'
'Alas!'
'If you speak truly, Wídfara, then may you live beyond this day in years of blessedness!'
'Éomer, my son! You lead the first éored,'
'If these kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.'
'but let word be sent to the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.'
'It is your doom, maybe, to tread strange paths that others dare not. This parting grieves me, and my strength is lessened by it; but now I must take the mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!'
'but I have far yet to go. Last night the moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark.'
'We saw it also, but that was in the dead of night before Gandalf left us.'
'I will ride now to the Hold, and there before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to me as soon as may be!'
'Of the Paths of the Dead?'
'Hirgon I am, errand-rider of Denethor, who bring you this token of war. Gondor is in great need. Often the Rohirrim have aided us, but now the Lord Denethor asks for all your strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.'
'The Red Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed come to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that all my strength and all my speed may be?'
'and great though your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.'
'But at the least you shall ride with me to Edoras and look on Meduseld; for that way I shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the great race will not begin till we reach the plains.'
'And in such a battle as we think to make on the fields of Gondor what would you do, Master Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, and greater of heart than of stature?'
'and also to do as I might bid. None of my Riders can bear you as burden. If the battle were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the minstrels; but it is a hundred leagues and two to Mundburg where Denethor is lord. I will say no more.'
'And our scouts say that they have cast trenches and stakes across the road. We cannot sweep them away in sudden onset.'
'All is night now.'
'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!'
'Then Denethor has heard no news of our riding and will despair of our coming.'
'Up Eorlingas! Fear no darkness!'
'He is dead. But Éomer King now rides in the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.'
'I do not think your law was made for such a chance,'
'We both have need of haste,'
'Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!'
'Nor will you again,'
'Edoras those courts are called,'
'Look!'
'Well do you see and speak,'
'This is idle talk,'
'Foolishness!'
'It is not so dark here,'
'It is true,'
'That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner. The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,'
'This counsel seems good to me now,'
'I will take thought for that ere I go,'
'And he now requires it of you again,'
'I will,'
'If this is bewitchment,'
'You have my pity,'
'That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,'
'Do you hear this, Wormtongue?'
'After him!'
'Now my guests, come!'
'I owe much to Éomer,'
'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,'
'You choose well,'
'May it keep you well!'
'It may well be so,'
'Where is Éomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.'
'You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has shaken the boughs,'
'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?'
'They bring fire,'
'Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,'
'I would that he had escaped,'
'Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,'
'I fret in this prison,'
'Helm! Helm!'
'Welcome, Éomer, sister-son!'
'Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?'
'And what may be the answer to your riddle?'
'But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault the stronghold of Saruman,'
'Nay!'
'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,'
'Herdsmen!'
'Yet also I should be sad,'
'Alas!'
'Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?'
'And glad shall I be to see it again,'
'It cannot be doubted that we witness the meeting of dear friends,'
'Hobbits?'
'My people came out of the North long ago,'
'For one thing,'
'I will come with you,'
'Come then!'
'But come now,'
'We will have peace,'
'Leagues upon leagues,'
's ear, that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say I and all who hold with me. The East-mark is my charge. the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.'
'Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride. We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink a little.'
'It will be quicker so. The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.'
's seat.'
'Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.'
'None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk, and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you. He is One of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell. Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his craft? Speak now and be swift!'
'Háma is my name. Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.'
's demand, but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall, be it folly or wisdom.'
'Has not the messenger from your gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.'
'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not find. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them? They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted tales and crooked promptings.'
'He had rebelled against my commands, and threatened death to Gríma in my hall.'
'that these evil days should be mine, and should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned. Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger, withering.'
'Where has Gríma stowed it?'
'Let all my folk get ready! But you my guests-truly you said, Gandalf, that the courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night, and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food. A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.'
'Here comes my counsellor.'
'Does that displease you?'
'And let food for my guests be set on the board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from noon!'
'it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left, not even Gríma. Gríma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean the rust from your sword.'
'And I do not send you from my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me and prove your faith.'
'See that he does no harm to any, but do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.'
'Come and take such refreshment as haste allows.'
'Most of all I owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!'
'and I give him now gladly. Yet it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!'
's day, while still I was a boy.'
'Hail Lady of Rohan!'
'I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Éomer my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?'
'Let the heralds announce to the folk that the Lady Éowyn will lead them!'
'But hearken all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsellors; most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.'
'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!'
'and they are burning as they come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for my folk!'
'It is a mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.'
'He was a mighty man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode forth to open battle, not to a siege.'
'If I could have set a spear in rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.'
'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe l should not so rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.'
's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we have yet to learn?'
'In the dark hour before dawn I doubted, but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.'
'and I will remember it, when we meet.'
'Where are their flocks? What are they, Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.'
'For not only the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even if you know them not.'
'For however the fortune of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?'
'Must we pass this way, where the carrion-beasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?'
'You accomplished much in an evening and a night!'
'though brief now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.'
'So these are the lost ones of your company, Gandalf? The days are fated to be filled with marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?'
'Your tongue is strangely changed; but the name sounds not unfitting so. Hobbits! No report that I have heard does justice to the truth.'
'But I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the halfling folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their deeds. for it is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling: and they can change their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.'
'I had not heard that they spouted smoke from their mouths.'
'These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be more fitting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?'
'Farewell, my hobbits! May we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!'
'Let us go and meet them!'
'and I curse the day when I first listened to it.'
's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.'
's their master'
'He will betray us; he will go - we shall be lost.'
