'If I had my way, you'
'Then you can wish again,'
'Aye, we must stick together,'
'You have spoken more than enough, Uglúk,'
'Put up your weapons!'
'Pick up those prisoners!'
'Well, what did you discover?'
'Now for the other!'
'Now then!'
'Now straight on!'
'Go on running,'
'You'
'Ai! Steady now!'
'Halt!'
'Enough!'
'Very well,'
'Now we'
'I know,'
'Indeed!'
'Splendid!'
'Nazgûl, Nazgûl,'
'You seem to know a lot,'
'Well, here we are,'
'Put those Halflings down!'
'They'
'I daresay you would,'
's mind, as if caught direct from the urgent thought of his enemy: '
'My dear tender little fools,'
'We have watched too long,'
'Yes!'
'Well!'
's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Uglúk. I have spoken.'
'I wonder how they would like it in Lugbúrz. They might think that Uglúk'
's prostrate form with a curse. Yet that probably saved his life, for Uglúk'
's have no more nonsense! We go straight west from here, and down the stair. From there straight to the downs, then along the river to the forest. And we march day and night. That clear?'
't play any tricks with them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.'
't spoil your usefulness for the Master.'
'll get bed and breakfast all right: more than you can stomach.'
'West and a little north. Follow Lugdush.'
'What do you think? Sit on the grass and wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?'
's the use of sending out mountain-maggots on a trip, only half trained. Run, curse you! Run while night lasts!'
'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.'
's your best hope. Off you go! And quick, before I knock a few more heads off, to put some sense into the others.'
'll feast on horseflesh yet, or something better.'
'Thought better of it, eh?'
'll see that orders are carried out in my command. And what else did you come back for? You went in a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?'
'd brought him along, that might have been useful-if these Nazgûl are all they make out.'
're for the War-and other purposes.'
'll be on your heels.'
're not to be rescued. Bind their legs!'
's doing, I should like to know?'
're as bad as the other rabble: the maggots and the apes of Lugbúrz. No good trying to charge with them. They'
's heart, yet at the same time he was wondering what use he could make of Grishnákh'
's faults.'
't want to meet him again.'
