'I marvel that you should ask me, lord,'
'One thief deserves another,'
'Worm! Worm!'
'You do what Sharkey says, always, don'
'Long years in the space of days it seems since I rode west; but never will I lean on a staff again. If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And if it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength? But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on!'
's bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring her to this pass!'
'These fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!'
'You need not follow him. I know of no evil you have done to me. You can have rest and food here for a while, until you are stronger and can go your own ways.'
't you, Worm? Will you tell them?'
'No, no!'
'You told me to; you made me do it,'
's eyes. '
'Wormtongue?'
'That is so,'
'Then it is true, as Éomer reported, that you are in league with the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'
's voice: '
'Much,'
'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,'
'You lie,'
'Assuredly not. lord,'
'Dear lord!'
'Mercy, lord!'
'Éowyn is safe now,'
'You lie,'
'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?'
'But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously, always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men'
'My men are weary with battle,'
'Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!'
'There is one thing I wonder about,'
'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself "
'"
'"
'"
'All except one thing,'
'The murderous rogue!'
'That may be so,'
'I? Nothing!'
'Say no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we are come?'
'Yet in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.'
's sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord bade you Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses, swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!'
'It is not to be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.'
'Did I not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff? That fool, Háma, has betrayed us!'
'It was found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other things are there which men have missed.'
'And this sword your master himself gave into my keeping.'
'I care for you and yours as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?'
'It is as I feared. This wizard has bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?'
'Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not send your faithful Gríma away!'
'But those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful steward. Let your counsellor Gríma keep all things till your return-and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it hopeful.'
' he said, what office of less honour would you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains-if any man would trust you with it?'
'Down on your belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.'
'This is your choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet again, I shall not be merciful.'
's face and opened his mouth as if to speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before the king'
's task was easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue'
's voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our destruction?'
's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?'
"Gandalf got here first. So I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of."
"I know the way."
's counsellor?'
's. Was there a date on the barrels?'
'And do not waste our time!'
