'You have found it,'
'I doubt it not,'
'There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord.'
'It is now a full hour past noon,'
'The Paths of the Dead!'
'Alas! Aragorn my friend!'
'That road I will take, nonetheless,'
'Harrowdale at last!'
'But if you would take my counsel,'
'So Aragorn has come then,'
'Whither did he go?'
'Then our paths are sundered,'
'Unless he has spoken words to you as his friend that we have not heard,'
'But how shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by daring the Door?'
'Ride on! Ride on!'
's command, to stay behind. He wondered, too, if the old King knew that he had been disobeyed and was angry. Perhaps not. There seemed to be some understanding between Dernhelm and Elfhelm, the Marshal who commanded the éored in which they were riding. He and all his men ignored Merry and pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been just another bag that Dernhelm was carrying. Dernhelm was no comfort: he never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and lonely. Now the time was anxious, and the host was in peril. They were less than a day'
'But our need is for aid in battle,'
'How do you know that?'
'And yet we need great haste,'
'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?'
'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,'
'Then we must set out as soon as may be,'
'Good tidings!'
'Then since we must look for fell deeds and the need of all our strength,'
'Well?'
'Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never,'
'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great heart will not be denied. Live now in blessedness; and when you sit in peace with your pipe, think of me! For never now shall I sit with you in Meduseld, as I promised, or listen to your herb-lore.'
's mind: '
'Théoden King,'
'Nay! One only,'
'So you spoke,'
'I saw also what you saw, Éomer. Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more bitterness and shame for a man'
'Awake, Éowyn, Lady of Rohan!'
'Éowyn, Éowyn!'
'Not long, my sister,'
'He is dead,'
'He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him,'
'It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,'
'But how is this?'
'As for myself,'
'All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,'
'But I do not desire healing,'
'Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed.'
'You shall judge,'
'Alas!'
'But first I will plead this excuse,'
's Deep when the Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that time the line was broken, and after came the mounds of the east-side: Fréalaf, Helm s sister-son, and Léofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine, and Fengel, and Thengel, and Théoden the latest. And when Théoden was named Éomer drained the cup. Then Éowyn bade those that served to fill the cups, and all there assembled rose and drank to the new king, crying: '
'Thus,'
'No good!'
'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?'
'When you crossed the fords yonder you entered it. But it is the realm of Théoden the King. None ride here save by his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?'
'Maybe a light helm might be found to fit him; but we have no mail or sword for one of his stature.'
'Shall I bid men sound the horns? But where is Aragorn? His place is empty and he has not eaten.'
'Before the night of the third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will then be one night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the day after. More speed we cannot make, if the strength of Rohan is to be gathered.'
'their gate is in Dunharrow; but no living man may pass it.'
'I had hoped that we should ride to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our parting is come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.'
'Our journey is almost at an end.'
'you would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.'
'Is he still here?'
'He is lost. We must ride without him, and our hope dwindles.'
'But as for the Paths of the Dead, you have yourself walked on their first steps. Nay. I speak no words of ill omen! The road that we have climbed is the approach to the Door, yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.'
'none now in the land of the living can tell his purpose.'
'And that way I would not go though all the hosts of Mordor stood before me, and I were alone and had no other refuge. Alas that a fey mood should fall on a man so greathearted in this hour of need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the earth? War is at hand.'
'Let the Riders be marshalled!'
'Too late now to turn aside. The fens of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!'
'How will you and your folk help us?'
'Mundburg is on fire!'
'For though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, then we shall have no returning. If it is saved, then the orc-host itself will be cut off. If you are faithful, Ghân-buri-Ghân, then we will give you rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.'
'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and I doubt not the way is narrow.'
'but we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long ere it can be set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?'
's aid today.'
's devices oft serve us in his despite. The accursed darkness itself has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down stone from stone, his orcs have taken away my greatest fear. The out-wall could have been held long against us. Now we can sweep through - if once we win so far.'
'I counsel that we rest now, and set out hence by night, and so time our going that we come upon the fields when tomorrow is as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.'
'What of it?'
'And mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since men spoke with mouth.'
's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the right when we pass the wall. And Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. Let the other companies behind follow these three that lead, as they have chance. Strike wherever the enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for we know not yet how things stand upon the field. Forth now, and fear no darkness!'
'You come none too soon, my friend. Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.'
's House. Will you suffer these to be challenged?'
'Where is the Lady Éowyn, my sister; for surely she should be lying beside the king, and in no less honour? Where have they bestowed her?'
'We seek the Steward, and men say that he is in this House. Has any hurt befallen him? And the Lady Éowyn, where is she?'
'Is it thus that we speak to our kings? Yet maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!'
'First you must rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?'
'I saw also what you saw, Éomer. Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this world have more bitterness and shame for a man'
'Call her!'
'Éomer! What joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?'
'But think no more on it!'
'but he bade me say farewell to Éowyn dearer than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.'
'All is vain, you say, if he has the Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?'
'I have little knowledge of these deep matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will go.'
'and we have suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill to bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot hope to lead even two thousands, and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
'Between us there can be no word of giving or taking, nor of reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and never has any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Théoden the Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and bring him back to rest with his own people.'
'Since the day when you rose before me out of the green grass of the downs I have loved you, and that love shall not fail. But now I must depart for a while to my own realm, where there is much to heal and set in order. But as for the Fallen, when all is made ready we will return for him; but here let him sleep a while.'
's son, have you your axe ready?'
'For there are certain rash words concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us. And now I have seen her with my eyes.'
'I will not say that she is the fairest lady that lives.'
'Had I seen her in other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I am ready to do battle on my own part with any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?'
'Now this is the funeral feast of Théoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of tidings of joy, for he would not grudge that I should do so, since he was ever a father of Éowyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many realms, such as have never before been gathered in this hall! Faramir, Steward of Gondor, and Prince of Ithilien, asks that Éowyn Lady of Rohan should be his wife, and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be trothplighted before you all.'
'to give thus to Gondor the fairest thing in your realm!'
'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the Shire and Holdwine of the Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!'
'Kings of old would have laden you with gifts that a wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet you will take naught, you say, but the arms that were given to you. This I suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is worthy; but my sister begs you to receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns of the Mark at the coming of the morning.'
'As for that,'
's eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed in, advancing their spears. '
'I will,'
'I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden King son of Thengel,'
'That you need not pursue them further,'
'There were no dwarves nor children,'
'Hobbits?'
'Halflings!'
'Peace, Éothain!'
'That is heavy tidings,'
'Your news is all of woe!'
'On foot?'
'We do not and we never have.'
'Hope does not remain,'
'I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them,'
'I had forgotten that,'
'True indeed,'
'Hasufel is his name,'
'Farewell, and may you find what you seek!'
'We shall see,'
'If you wish to know what I think,'
'We are no phantoms,'
'I greet you,'
'You speak justly, lord,'
'Take this, dear lord!'
'How comes this?'
'It is my doing, lord,'
'To lay at your feet, my lord,'
'Westu Théoden hál!'
'You have yourself already taken it,'
'Nay, lord,'
'Now indeed there is hope of victory!'
'And if any will bear him,'
'Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,'
'I will forget my wrath for a while, Éomer son of Éomund,'
'It shall he so,'
'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would it appear,'
'Ride, Théoden!'
'Then let us be swift,'
'It will not be long I fear,'
'We need not fly much further,'
'At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,'
'The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm'
'I fear that he will not come now,'
'That is well,'
'Gúthwinë!'
'Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,'
'I shall not find it easy to repay you,'
'I hear them,'
'So the minstrels say,'
'Hail, Lord of the Mark!'
'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,'
'This is become a dreary place,'
'Here let them rest!'
'There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,'
'And I too will go up,'
'If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young serpent?'
's son warn you against foolish words. You speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and only little wit can excuse you.'
'I would cut off your head, beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground '
'When you know more you will understand why you have angered my companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor to any of its folk, neither to man nor to horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?'
'But wanderers in the Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt. First tell me your right name.'
'We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far away, but neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are fleeing from him, then you had best leave this land. There is trouble now on all our borders, and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving no foreign lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in these times the unbidden stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?'
' he muttered. '
'The Orcs are destroyed.'
'We counted all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.'
'And what may they be? It is a strange name.'
's tales out of the North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?'
' and make ready to ride to the Entwade.'
'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king'
'At least to me, and to many; though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.'
'Great harm is this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever in the wars on the East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed to me, and likely to prove a great captain of his people when his time came. But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?'
' he said. '
'You will not find your friends on the North-borders.'
'We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that any living thing broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.'
'It is hard to be sure of anything among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf in company walk in our daily fields; and folk speak with the Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?'
'But I do not doubt you, nor the deed which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until the king himself shall give them leave, and more strict is the command in these days of peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with me, and you will not. Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.'
'My company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good faith. Do not fail.'
'May he bear you well and to better fortune than Gárulf, his late master!'
'Return with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!'
's axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!'
'If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass these gates.'
'It is a joy to us to see you return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only with grief!'
'Go, Háma, and seek my own sword! Gríma has it in his keeping. Bring him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?'
'For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of the hall. But there are other reasons.'
'that to crooked eyes truth may wear a wry face.'
'and he is the last of that House.'
'And he is not the last. There is Éowyn, daughter of Éomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.'
'But until that time pardon me, and in token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.'
'Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!'
'and they can tell a sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder towards Isengard?'
'You come at last, but too late, and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm'
's Gate! Farewell!'
'Let us drive through such foes as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm'
's host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain he has sent forth.'
's Gate. There we can turn and give battle.'
'I, Éomer son of Éomund, speak.'
'Our scouts have gained no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.'
'They are burning or despoiling all that is left in the vale.'
'Gúthwinë for the Mark!'
'Come! We must get back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!'
'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?'
'but they are only the scream of birds and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.'
'Now that I see you safe, I am glad indeed.'
'Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,'
'So it would seem,'
'And when their spears have rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!'
'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.'
's son!'
'They shall ride with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they have a mind.'
