'No, he is gone,'
'Yes, lord,'
'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,'
'Greatly changed he seemed to me since I saw him first in the king'
'I am going to war, Master Meriadoc,'
'Come now, Meriadoc!'
'No mail have we to fit you,'
'Éowyn! Éowyn!'
'Hail, King of the Mark!'
'Let his knights remain here,'
'Éowyn, Éowyn!'
'Where is the king?'
's heart, and with it the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of the Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: '
'To health?'
'Do not be afraid,'
'And by the love of him also,'
'My lord,'
'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'
'Of Númenor?'
'Then you think that the Darkness is coming?'
'Then if you will have it so, lady,'
'That I know,'
'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of your House, and of you, and of all your people. Say to your brother: beyond the shadows we may meet again!'
'is all well with you?'
'And he has passed into the shadows from which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.'
'that in the moonless nights but little while ago a great host in strange array passed by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and vanished into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.'
'grimmer, older. Fey I thought him, and like one whom the Dead call.'
'that you should be armed for battle. I have granted it, as I could. For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end.'
'nor any time for the forging of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a knife. A sword you have.'
' But thereupon Éomer rode up in haste, and with him came the knights of the household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in wonder at the carcase of the fell beast that lay there: and their steeds would not go near. But Éomer leaped from the saddle, and grief and dismay fell upon him as he came to the king'
'Théoden King! Théoden King!'
'Éowyn, how come you here? What madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!'
's household they could not yet bring from the field; for seven of the king'
'Have even the women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?'
'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke much in their dreaming, before they sank into the deadly darkness. Also it is given to me to see many things far off.'
's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!'
'It may be so. At least while there is an empty saddle of some fallen Rider that I can fill, and there are deeds to do. But to hope? I do not know.'
'will wish soon to rise and depart; but she should not be permitted to do so, if you can in any way restrain her, until at least ten days be passed.'
'And those who have not swords can still die upon them. Would you have the folk of Gondor gather you herbs only, when the Dark Lord gathers armies? And it is not always good to be healed in body. Nor is it always evil to die in battle, even in bitter pain. Were I permitted, in this dark hour I would choose the latter.'
'It is not lack of care that grieves me. No houses could be fairer, for those who desire to be healed. But I cannot lie in sloth, idle, caged. I looked for death in battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.'
'Darkness Unescapable?'
'Yet now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. For this House has become to me of all dwellings the most blessed.'
'Wish me joy, my liege-lord and healer!'
'It was made by the Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm. Eorl the Young brought it from the North. He that blows it at need shall set fear in the hearts of his enemies and joy in the hearts of his friends, and they shall hear him and come to him.'
'I said not Éomer,'
'It shall be so,'
'The time for fear is past.'
'But you, Wormtongue, you have done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.'
'Receive now this cup and drink in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!'
'A year shall I endure for every day that passes until your return.'
